Aerospace Studies—Air Force ROTC
Professor Lieutenant Colonel Theriault, USAF, Detachment Commander and Department Chair; Assistant Pro-
fessor Major Wood, USAF, Operations Officer and Director of Undergraduate Studies

Eligibility Requirements
All first-year students and sophomores are eligible to enroll in the General Military Course in the Air 

Force Reserve Officer Training Corps. For enrollment in the Professional Officer Course, the student must have 
successfully completed the General Military Course and a field training encampment; must execute a written 
agreement with the government to complete the Professional Officer Course; must be sworn into the enlisted 
reserve; and must agree to accept a commission in the US Air Force upon graduation. Students in the General 
Military Course and Professional Officer Course are required to attend two hours of leadership laboratory each 
week. All courses, except 99L, are open to all other students with consent of instructor.

Courses in Aerospace Studies—Air Force ROTC (AEROSCI)

General Military Courses
99L. Leadership Laboratory. Instruction in drill and ceremonies, wearing the uniform, giving commands, 
and other leadership activities. Mandatory for all Air Force ROTC cadets. Must be repeated each semester. 
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Staff.
101. Heritage and Values of the United States Air Force. A survey course designed to introduce students 
to the United States Air Force and provides an overview of the basic characteristics, missions, and organization 
of the Air Force. Leadership Laboratory mandatory for AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
102. Heritage and Values of the United States Air Force. Continuation of Aerospace Studies 101. 
A survey course designed to introduce students to the United States Air Force and provides an overview of 
the basic characteristics, missions, and organization of the Air Force. Leadership Laboratory mandatory for 
AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.

Second Year
201. Team and Leadership Fundamentals. STS Course focuses on laying the foundation for teams and 
leadership. Topics include skills that will allow cadets to improve their leadership on a personal level and 
within a team. The courses will prepare cadets for their field training experience where they will be able to put 
the concepts learned into practice. The purpose is to instill a leadership mindset and to motivate sophomore 
students to transition from AFROTC cadet to AFROTC officer candidate. Leadership Laboratory mandatory for 
AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
202. Team and Leadership Fundamentals. STS Continuation of Aerospace Studies 201. Course focuses 
on laying the foundation for teams and leadership. Topics include skills that will allow cadets to improve 
their leadership on a personal level and within a team. The courses will prepare cadets for their field training 
experience where they will be able to put the concepts learned into practice. The purpose is to instill a leadership 
mindset and to motivate sophomore students to transition from AFROTC cadet to AFROTC officer candidate. 
Leadership Laboratory mandatory for AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 109

Professional Officer Courses
All students selected to continue in aerospace studies must pursue the following courses.

Third Year
301S. Leading People and Effective Communication. EI Course teaches cadets advanced skills and 
knowledge in management and leadership. Special emphasis is placed on enhancing leadership skills and 
communication. Cadets have an opportunity to try out these leadership and management techniques in a 
supervised environment as juniors and seniors. Leadership Laboratory required for AFROTC cadets. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302S. Leading People and Effective Communication. EI Continuation of Aerospace Studies 301S. 
Course teaches cadets advanced skills and knowledge in management and leadership. Special emphasis is placed 
on enhancing leadership skills and communication. Cadets have an opportunity to try out these leadership and 
management techniques in a supervised environment as juniors and seniors. Leadership Laboratory required 
for AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Fourth Year
401S. National Security Affairs/Preparation for Active Duty. EI Course is designed for college seniors 
and gives them the foundation to understand their role as military officers in American society. It is an overview 
of the complex social and political issues facing the military profession and requires a measure of sophistication 
commensurate with the senior college level. The final semester provides information that will prepare the cadets 
for Active Duty. Leadership Laboratory mandatory for AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
402S. National Security Affairs/Preparation for Active Duty. EI Continuation of Aerospace Studies 
401S. Course is designed for college seniors and gives them the foundation to understand their role as military 
officers in American society. It is an overview of the complex social and political issues facing the military 
profession and requires a measure of sophistication commensurate with the senior college level. The final 
semester provides information that will prepare the cadets for Active Duty. Leadership Laboratory mandatory 
for AFROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

African & African American Studies
Professor Neal, Chair; Professor of the Practice Smith, Associate Chair; Associate Professor Royal, Director of 
Undergraduate Studies; Professors Baker, Bonilla-Silva, Burton, Crichlow, Darity, DeFrantz, Dubois, French, 
Matory, Neal, Piot, and Powell; Associate Professors Cobb, Haynie, Jaji, Lentz-Smith, Lubiano, Makhulu, Royal, 
and Winters; Assistant Professors Aidoo and Daly; Professor of the Practice Smith; Associate Professor of the 
Practice Shapiro

A major and a minor are available in this program.
The Department of African & African American Studies provides students with an interdisciplinary 

approach to the field, within which they may focus on Africa or the Americas. The program encourages study 
abroad in Africa, available through the Global Education Office.

African & African American Studies courses are listed below. (Full descriptions of cross-listed courses 
may be found in the bulletin course listings of the particular department or program cited in the cross-listings, 
for example, to learn more about African & African American Studies 140, see Music 140). In addition, Arabic 
language courses are taught in the Asian & Middle Eastern Studies Program, and other relevant language courses 
are taught by the Department of Romance Studies.

Courses in African & African American Studies (AAAS)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Introduction to African American Studies. CCI, CZ, SS A range of disciplinary perspectives on key 
topics in African American Studies: slavery and abolitionism, theories of race and racism, gender and race, the 
era of Jim Crow, cultural expressions, political and intellectual thought, African American freedom struggles 
from the seventeenth through the twentieth centuries, and race and public policy. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Literature 102



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)110

103. Introduction to African Studies (DS3 or DS4). ALP, CCI, CZ A range of disciplinary perspectives 
on key topics in contemporary African Studies: nationalism and pan-Africanism, imperialism and colonialism, 
genocide and famine, development and democratization, art and music, age and gender. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 105, History 129, Political Science 108, International Comparative Studies 
110
104. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 106, Literature 243, 
Spanish 160
104S. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201S; also C-L: Literature 243S, Spanish 160S, International Comparative 
Studies 106S
109S. African Mbira Music: An Experiential Learning Class. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Music 
133S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 133S
133S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 183S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 187S, International Comparative Studies 183S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 183S, Public Policy 175S, Human Rights
134. Old Worlds/New Histories, 500-1500 CE. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 105; also C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 105, Marxism and Society
139. History of Rock: Rhythm & Blues and Rock & Roll to Indie Rock and Hip-Hop. ALP, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Music 143; also C-L: History 108
140. Introduction to Jazz. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Music 140
146. Motown and American Soul Music. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Music 146
163S. Gateway Seminar: Gandhi, King, Mandela. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 163S; 
also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 177S, International Comparative Studies 163S
171. Business Anthropology: Anthropologists in the Workplace. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 171; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 171, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 171, 
Sociology 171
182S. Gateway Seminar: American Slavery and Freedom: The Rise and Destruction of Slavery in 
the US. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see History 182S
190. Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in African & African American 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Seminars: Special Topics. Topics vary semester to semester. Open only to 
students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics. Seminar version of African & African American Studies 190. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 196FS; also C-L: Global Health 196FS, Psychology 196FS, Public Policy 196FS, Sociology 
196FS, Cultural Anthropology 196FS, Science & Society
207. African Americans Since the Civil War. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see History 347; also C-L: 
Documentary Studies
209. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 327; also C-L: 
Portuguese 260, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 327, Latin American Studies, Human 
Rights
210. Modern Africa. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 204; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 268
211. Anthropology of Money. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 350; also C-L: 



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 111

Economics 309, Public Policy 306, International Comparative Studies 328
213. Global Brazil. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 328; also C-L: Latin American Studies 328, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 328, Human Rights
214. South Africa: Past and Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This course will explore the history of modern 
South Africa, from the beginning of the mineral revolution in the 1860s to the post-apartheid present. We will 
cover such topics as mining-centered industrialization, the transformation of the countryside, the emergence 
of Afrikaner and African nationalism, segregationist ideology, the construction of apartheid, the liberation 
movements, the establishment and promises of multi-party democracy, the AIDS epidemic, as well as re-
emergence of social movements in the contemporary period. We will further consider the place of South Africa 
as a regional, continental, and indeed world power. Instructor: Shapiro. One course. C-L: History 208, Political 
Science 221, Public Policy 214, International Comparative Studies, Human Rights
215S. Slave Society in Colonial Anglo-America: The West Indies, South Carolina, and Virginia. 
CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 320S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
216S. Gender and Slavery in the Americas. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 213S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 211S
217S. The Atlantic Slave Trade. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 316S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 209S, Latin American Studies
218. The Caribbean, 1492-1700. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 318; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 255, Latin American Studies, International Comparative Studies
219. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
319; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 263, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
219, Latin American Studies, Human Rights
220SL. West African Rootholds in Dance. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 335SL; also C-L: 
Religion 240SL
221SL. Capoeira: Practice and Culture. ALP, CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Dance 235SL; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 221SL, Romance Studies 235SL
222. Dance and Religion in Asia and Africa. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 367; also C-L: 
Religion 244, International Comparative Studies 214
224. African Diaspora Literature: Twentieth- and Twenty-First-Century Black Writers. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see English 276
225S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
350S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 213S, Cultural Anthropology 262S, Public Policy 387S, International 
Comparative Studies 368S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 350S, Human Rights
226. Crime and the City from Dickens to The Wire. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 313
226D. Crime and the City from Dickens to The Wire. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 
313D; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 313D
227. African American Art. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Art History 283
228S. Fictions That Mark the Moment. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Course is an engagement with novels from 
spectacular moments of history, an imagination of the future, a response to narrative conventions of realism 
and thinking with and against the grain of social understandings. Look at examples of historical, speculative, 
postcolonial, experimental, science, magical realist fictions and theoretical work. Will consider the means by 
which narratives produce or rely on ethical beliefs and arguments within the specifics of their world-making as 
well as the ethical problems presented by relations of power within the particular histories of the texts’ various 
moments. Instructor: Lubiano. One course. C-L: Literature 382S, English 379S
230. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 326; also 
C-L: History 358, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 326, Human Rights
230S. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 326S; also 
C-L: History 358S



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)112

231S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom 
Struggle. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 320S; also C-L: History 356S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 320S, Human Rights
232. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Education 220; also C-L: Sociology 202, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 221, Human 
Rights
233S. Writing American Politics. CZ, EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 276S; also 
C-L: History 360S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 226S
234S. Comparative Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
235S; also C-L: Public Policy 285S, International Comparative Studies 213S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 235S
236S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. 
C-L: see Documentary Studies 347S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 246S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 246S, Human Rights
237S. Advanced Research Seminar in Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, R, SS, W One course. 
C-L: see Political Science 236S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 236S, Human 
Rights
238S. Activism & Christianity in Modern America. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Religion 238S; 
also C-L: Study of Ethics 238S, Political Science 244S
239. Racial Attitudes, Racial Prejudice, and Racial Politics. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political 
Science 238
240. The Modern Caribbean after Emancipation. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 321; also C-L: 
Romance Studies 321, Cultural Anthropology 322, International Comparative Studies 319
242S. Race, Gender, and Sexuality. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
364S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 264S
243. The Civil Rights Movement. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 348; also C-L: Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 348, Human Rights, Ethics Elective
245S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American 
South. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 362S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 306S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 362S, Human Rights
246. Sociology of Racism in America. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 215; also C-L: 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 316, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 215, Marxism 
and Society, Human Rights
247S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 
320S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 320S, Latin American Studies 320S, Information Science 
+ Studies 323S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 323S, 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 318S, Human Rights
248. Hip Hop and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 248; also C-L: English 299, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 299
249. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies 317; also C-L: Religion 234, Public Policy 253, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 249, Human Rights
251. The Anthropology of Race. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 208; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 239, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 208, Human 
Rights
252S. Giants of Jazz: A Journey into the Lives and Music of the Masters of Jazz Music. ALP, 
CCI One course. C-L: see Music 244S
257. Introduction to Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 113

Political Science 205; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 205, Human Rights
261D. Race, Genomics, and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS The field of genetics has been at the forefront of 
discourse concerning the concept of “race” in humans. This course explores human origins, human variation, 
human identity, and human health through a broad range of enduring and emerging themes and challenging 
questions related to race and genetics (and now, genomics) on a global scale. Students will acquire knowledge 
and skills required for integrative analyses of the relevant scientific, ethical, legal, societal, cultural, and 
psychosocial issues. Open to students at all levels from any discipline in the arts, humanities, and sciences 
(natural, social, formal, and applied). Instructor: Royal. One course. C-L: Science & Society 258D, Global Health 
258D, Cultural Anthropology 261D, Biology 261D, Visual and Media Studies 274D
263. Black Europe: Race, Ethnicity and Diaspora in Contemporary Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 263
263S. Black Europe: Race, Ethnicity and Diaspora in Contemporary Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 263S
264. Latin American Wars of Independence. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 264; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 232, Political Science 257, Latin American Studies
269. Black Gods and Kings: Priests and Practices of the Afro-Atlantic Religions. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 269; also C-L: Religion 270
270S. Religion in Black America. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 236S
271. Humanitarianism in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see History 207; also C-L: Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 207, Islamic Studies, Human Rights
274S. Islam in the Americas. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 384S; also C-L: History 351S, 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 230S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 374S, Islamic 
Studies, Human Rights
276. Religion and Race. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Religion 276; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 294
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas. EI, SS One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 283SL; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 285SL, Latin American Studies 283SL, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 283SL, Latin American Studies, Human Rights
285S. Nigeria: A Modern History. CCI, CZ Nigeria is Africa’s largest country by population, its largest 
economy, and one of the most diverse nation-states in the contemporary world. It is also a place of considerable 
poverty, wealth disparity, and political discord. How did Nigeria become this country of superlatives, good and 
bad? This course examines Nigeria’s history over the last two centuries—a period encompassing the Atlantic 
trade in enslaved Africans, British colonial rule, the era of decolonization, and the recent histories of military 
rule and democracy. Along the way, we will consider Nigeria’s place in the broader history of modern Africa. 
Instructor: Daly. One course. C-L: History 217S, International Comparative Studies 242S
290. Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290-1. Special Topics in Performance. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290-3. Special Topic in an Individual African American Author. One course. C-L: see English 390-3
290-4. Special Topics in African American Literary Genres. One course. C-L: see English 390-4
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in African & African 
American Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics. Seminar version of African & African American Studies 290. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 295S; also C-L: Religion 295S, International Comparative Studies 222S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 296S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 295S, Human Rights



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)114

304S. Black Politics. SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 305S
306. Africa and Arabia: Cultures, Communities, and Connections. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 304; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 306
307. Development and Africa. CCI, CZ, SS Addresses the vexed issue of economic development in Africa—
its many failures, its occasional successes—from the early colonial period to the present. Focuses especially on 
the transition from the 1960s “modernizing” moment to the millennium projects and humanitarian aid of the 
present. Will read the works of development experts, World Bank executives, anthropologists and historians, 
asking why this massively financed project has experienced such failure and exploring what can be done. 
Instructor: Piot. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 307, Public Policy 207, International Comparative 
Studies 308, Marxism and Society
310. African American Women and History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 349; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 237, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 310, 
Human Rights
310S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies). CCI, CZ, SS Utilizes four case studies to outline 
components of conflict analysis in Africa. Examines regional crisis nexus between Darfur, Chad and Central 
African Republic. Looks at issues of postcoloniality, autochthony, migration, citizenship, land tenure, and 
inequality. On a theoretical level, identifies potentially crosscutting, deeper layers of contemporary crises in 
Africa with the objective of establishing a series of templates, a ‘protocol’, for comparative conflict analysis and 
conflict management in Africa. Instructor: Smith. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 310S, Public Policy 
218S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 218S, Human Rights
312. War and Public Health in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI, SS An inquiry into the nature of contemporary war 
in sub-Saharan Africa and its human cost. Uses public health as a parameter to assess the impact of organized 
collective violence on people’s lives. Link between war and public health established and measured with respect 
to civilian deaths, gender based violence, physical and psychological trauma, mental disorders, malnutrition and 
famine, and the spread of epidemic diseases, inter alia HIV/AIDS. Special attention is paid to rape as “a weapon 
of war”, to the trafficking of human beings in war zones, the child soldier phenomenon, and to death counts as 
a vector of humanitarian or political advocacy. Instructor: Smith. One course. C-L: Public Policy 333, Cultural 
Anthropology 312, Global Health 312, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 312, Human 
Rights
314. Representing Slavery. ALP, CCI, EI, SS Examines representations of the Atlantic slave trade in 
scholarship, literature, film, popular culture, and local site visits. We will examine portrayals of people who were 
enslaved, people who enslaved, as well as the nature of capture, the Middle Passage, and plantation life. We will 
also explore contemporary commemorations of the slave trade within museums, and the political mobilization 
of this history within the reparations movement. Through an examination of these materials, we will ask “why 
represent slavery?” and “what is at stake when representing slavery?” Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 254
315. Africa, Youth and Democracy. CCI, R, SS Africa is an island of youth—a Peter Pan’s Neverland—on 
an overall graying planet. This course explores the continent’s “youthfulness,” in particular south of the Sahara 
where four out of ten inhabitants are under age 15—twice as many as in the United States. In a part of the world 
where the “principle of seniority” traditionally coupled aging with the hoarding of knowledge, authority, wealth 
and power, what does the abundance of young people mean for Africa’s present and future, for its economy and 
popular culture, the transmission of norms and values, new digital lifestyles, war and peace? Special attention 
will be given to hypotheses linking youth and democratization. Instructor: Smith. One course. C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 315
316S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Explores key 
themes in post World War II South African history, paying attention to the plethora of anti-apartheid struggles, 
while giving voice to some pro-apartheid proponents. Discusses how apartheid affected people’s daily lives, the 
ideological and programmatic opposition to apartheid, and internecine struggles between and within anti-
apartheid organizations and movements. Concludes with contemporary reflections on life during apartheid. 
Instructor: Shapiro. One course. C-L: History 386S, Public Policy 327S, Political Science 337S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 316S, Human Rights



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 115

317S. Africa before Colonialism. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W This undergraduate seminar considers the history of 
Africa south of the Sahara from the beginning of the Holocene era to 1800, focusing on processes of community 
formation and political and social change. Using a variety of sources and methods, it traces major debates and 
themes in the “deep” African past across a number of regions and time periods. These themes include state 
formation, the dynamic reproduction of social structures through migration, the political meanings of health 
and healing, the development of ideas about gender, the relationship between Islam and Christianity and other 
cosmologies, and Africa’s interaction with the wider world. Instructor: Daly. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 221S, History 341S
318SA. New York Scenes. ALP, R One course. C-L: see English 315SA; also C-L: Theater Studies 218SA, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 315SA, Art History 318SA, Jewish Studies 315SA
319. East Africa and the World. CCI, CZ, R, W An interconnected history of East Africa and the many 
places linked to the region by trade, migration, and politics. Using archival, oral, and artistic source materials, 
considers how East Africans’ lives have been shaped by mobility, from the dhow trade of the Indian Ocean, to 
the commercial hustle of contemporary Guangzhou and Dubai. Analyzes how ideas about race, class, gender, 
and sex changed over time in this complex setting. Instructor: Daly. One course. C-L: History 206, International 
Comparative Studies 316
320. Black Dance. ALP, CCI, R, W Exploration of composition and performance structures commonly 
described as black dance. Working with cultural criticism contemporary with emergent modes of black dance, 
assesses political motivations and aesthetic strategies of artists and writers working explicitly in this idiom. 
Considers possibility of black dance performed by people of First World, European, and Asian descent. 
Examines concert dance, social dance, religious dance. Instructor: DeFrantz. One course. C-L: Dance 336
321. Visualizing the Caribbean. ALP, CCI, R, SS Art (paintings, installations, performance art) and film 
on the Caribbean offer vantage points for analyzing alternative ways through which the region has been thought, 
imagined and produced. They are periodized semiotic productions that feed into and are marked by perspectives 
that are at once global, national, and even personal. Considering the constitutive contexts of these productions 
and performances, we will attempt to glean the diverse perspectives, and the way these have influenced 
sociocultural policy and offer alternative interpretations of diasporic lifeways of Caribbean people. Instructor: 
Crichlow. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 368, International Comparative Studies 318, Latin American 
Studies 321
322S. James Baldwin and Toni Morrison. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 399S; also 
C-L: English 380S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 402S
325S. Introduction to Hip-Hop Production. ALP, EI, STS Introduction to Hip-Hop Production 
examines the history, background, functionality, and techniques of hip-hop production. This class will examine 
the art of sampling, borrowing, context, and practices in hip-hop production, while studying the history of beat 
machines and digital audio workstations. Instructor: Douthit. One course. C-L: Music 337S
329. The Black Atlantic. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 383; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 226
331. Black Popular Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ The production and circulation of African American popular 
cultural forms including, but not limited to, popular literature, music, film, television, and art in the twentieth 
century. The ways in which African American popular culture may reflect the particular values and ethos of 
African Americans and the larger American society. Topics may include black cinema, blues and jazz music, 
black nationalism, hip hop, black social movements, blacks and sports culture, popular dance, and the cultural 
history of black style. Instructor: Lubiano and staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 230
332. Black Theater Workshop. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 243
333S. The Wire. CCI, EI, SS Examines all 60 episodes of the HBO series “The Wire.” Described as “socially 
robust” by one television scholar, the series dramatizes the real world experiences of poor, mostly African 
American, residents of Baltimore struggling to survive by way of the underground drug economy, while city 
officials and the police department strive to bring the illegal trade in check. The course brings all 60 episodes 
into conversation with relevant texts in anthropology, sociology, cultural geography, queer and literary theory. 
Requirements include weekly blog entries and a final keyword project. Students should have background in 
interpretive social science and social theory. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Makhulu. One course. C-L: 



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)116

Cultural Anthropology 333S
335. The History of Hip-Hop. ALP, CCI What began as a localized activity designed to provide a safe haven 
for Black and Latino youth in New York City, has become a global brand that has had a documented impact on 
the cultural, political and economic realities of youth throughout the globe. This course will examine the organic 
social and cultural foundations of hip-hop, as well as the key aesthetic innovators/innovations, and the debates 
that have arisen over hip-hop’s increased influence. Instructor: Neal. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
335, Music 335, Visual and Media Studies 337, English 381
336. The Black Performance Tradition: Michael Jackson and Prince. ALP, CCI Examines the Black 
Performance context that produced Jackson’s singular creative genius within the realms of music, movement 
and politics, including the influence of Black vernacular practices like signifying and sampling, the network of 
Black social spaces known as the Chitlin’ Circuit, the impact of Black migration patterns to urban spaces in the 
Midwest, and Black performance traditions including Blackface minstrelsy. Instructor: Neal. One course. C-L: 
Music 336, Visual and Media Studies 353
337. Hollywood and Africa: Case Studies in Filmic Representation. ALP, CCI, W This course on 
Hollywood films about Africa—from classics such as “African Queen” (East Africa), “Tarzan” (Equatorial Africa) 
and “Out of Africa” (Kenya) to recent productions such as “Blood Diamond” (Sierra Leone), “The Last King of 
Scotland” (Uganda), “Lord of War” (arms trade), “The Constant Gardner” (Kenya) and “Black Hawk Down” 
(Somalia)—will tack back and forth between filmic representation and case study, using the latter to critique 
the former. As contrastive material, the class will also draw on non-Hollywood films about Africa, for example 
“Hotel Rwanda” (Rwanda) or “Lumumba” (DRC). Instructor: Smith. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
336, International Comparative Studies 337
338. Popular Representations of Black Masculinity. ALP, CCI The course will examine the production 
and circulation of representations of “Black Masculinity” in post-19th century American culture, within popular 
realms of expression including film, visual culture, music videos, advertising, popular music, television, drama 
and stage, literature, and dance/performance. The course will also explore the ways stereotypical images of 
Black masculinity have impacted public policy perceptions of African Americans and the ways that Black cultural 
producers have used Black masculinity as sites to stage alternative perceptions of Black humanity. Instructor: 
Neal. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 340, English 380
339S. Women and Film: Directors of the Diaspora. ALP, CCI Black women filmmakers have been 
actively involved in filmmaking since the early 20th century, and occupy notable positions in the 21st century 
media environment. Artists such as Ava Duvernay and Julie Dash demand critical attention to black women 
film and video artists. Films made by Black women are constructed in a variety of forms, such as animation, 
documentary, experimental, and narrative. These works bring a unique perspective to the screen. This course 
will give students an opportunity to view films, examine the specifics of film/video production in general, 
compare the various works produced by women direc, and acquire the skills necessary for film/video cultural 
criticism. Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 370S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 339S
341S. Race in Durham. CCI, R, SS Individual student research, archival and interview-based, on the 
history and current status of ideas about race, racial discrimination, and race relations in the city of Durham, 
as a window into one regional and local pattern that illuminates larger patterns of race in the US. Open to 
undergraduates at both NCCU and Duke. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 332S, 
History 339S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 336S, Human Rights
343. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking. ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS Examination of 
the meaning of migration in the global world through cross-disciplinary texts and visual media. Situates 
the phenomenon of human trafficking within the context of these general movements focusing on the risks 
involved when people endanger their lives to find a better and more strategic position in the world. Explores 
how these experiences should be interpreted, and how processes and the politics of race, space and place are a 
condition and/or outcome of these movements. Investigates and considers ways to resolve some of the problems 
associated with such movements. Instructor: Crichlow. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies 343, Cultural 
Anthropology 342, Sociology 343, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 339, Human Rights
345. African Americans, Mass Incarceration and Citizenship. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Explores in depth 
the presence of African Americans within the phenomenon of U.S. mass incarceration and its implications for 



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 117

notions of citizenship. Surveys the history of prison build-up resulting from legislation and policy over the past 
forty years including the governmental discussions of drug policy and welfare reform that disproportionately 
affected African Americans. Course will explore definitions of citizenship and the means by which African 
American citizens were and are both included in and excluded from participation in the movement toward 
mass incarceration as part of their changing position in the U.S. polity. Instructor: Lubiano. One course. C-L: 
Literature 343, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 345, Human Rights
346S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W This course uses 
a comparative framework to assess race in two societies founded on premises of racial inequality: South Africa 
and the United States. We will also explore some of the social, cultural and political exchanges that have taken 
place between African Americans and Black South Africans over the course of the twentieth century, considering 
the implications of transnational historical experience. Topics covered include segregation, race relations in 
the countryside, twentieth century struggles for civil rights/liberation, the American anti-apartheid movement 
and reparations. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Shapiro. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 351S, History 396S, Political Science 336S, Public Policy 326S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 349S, Human Rights
347S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective. CCI, CZ, R, SS Against the cross-cultural 
backdrop of other systems of hereditary privilege and of the political and economic changes that threaten them, 
we will examine the history, the ideologies, and the psychology of white supremacy in the United States. It will 
be our task to understand both the insiders’ point of view and its social context, which includes the mid-20th-
century civil rights reforms, affirmative action, neoliberalism, and the progressive erosion of white monopolies 
on honor, voting rights, due process, a living wage, and upward mobility in US society. Instructor: Matory. One 
course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 305S, History 385S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
305S, Human Rights
348. African Art: From Royal Court to Contemporary Marketplace. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Art History 345; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 223
350S. Law and Literature: Race Matters. CZ, SS This course explores the intersectionalities of race and 
law. We’ll focus on issues like sexuality, adoption, and marriage, the era and residue of Jim Crow, as well as the 
meaning and intent of affirmative action in educational contexts. We’ll use case law and some literary fiction to 
expose and explore these issues with a particular interest in understanding how race matters in the construction 
of US citizenship. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 350S
352. Pigging Out: The Cultural Politics of Food. CCI, EI, SS Examines cultural influences of food while 
linking class, geography, and ethnicity to food practices. Investigates link between overeating and cheap food, 
under-eating and expensive food; discrepancy between cost and quality; changing diets in US and elsewhere; 
current debates regarding food production, specifically in the U.S., Americas, Africa and Asia. Discussion of 
Cargill companies’ restrictions on spread of their hybrid grains; questionable agricultural practices, e.g. animal 
cruelty, overuse of pesticides, condition of migrants. Environmental policies examined in relation to pursuit of 
such industrial agricultural practices. Will include hands-on experiments with food preparation and tasting. 
Instructor: Crichlow. One course. C-L: Sociology 374, International Comparative Studies 206
380. France and Africa: The Politics and Culture of (Post-)Coloniality. CCI, CZ Examination of the 
Franco-African relationship over time, from the four “communes” in Senegal to the present, through a political 
but also broader cultural lens. France’s colonial doctrine and practices, African resistance and collaboration, “la 
francophonie” and the postcolonial “Françafrique” are analyzed as well as collective imaginaries on either side 
and how they shaped each other in literature, film, the social sciences or everyday life. The course is taught in 
English but a preceptorial class in French is offered in addition so that students can meet the requirement for 
their major or minor in French. Newcomers to Africa are welcome. Instructor: Smith. One course. C-L: Romance 
Studies 380, History 372, International Comparative Studies 364
380P. France and Africa: The Politics and Culture of (Post-)Coloniality Preceptorial. A 
preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent enrollment in African & African American Studies 380 or Romance 
Studies 380. Course counts toward the language requirement for the French major or minor if student enrolls in 
the preceptorial. Students need to have the proficiency to partake in discussions in French in the preceptorial, as 
well as to complete their readings and their final paper in African & African American Studies 380 or Romance 
Studies 380 in French. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Smith. C-L: Romance Studies 



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)118

380P
385S. Race, Gender and Culture of the African Diaspora. CCI, CZ, SS Course reveals the diversity 
of black life in the Americas, Europe, and the Middle East through film and classical and contemporary 
ethnographies by the likes of W. E. B. DuBois, Zora Neale Hurston, Fernando Ortiz, and others. Examines 
diverse analytical tropes that illuminate how cultures and communities reproduce themselves amid exploitation 
and stigma. Instructor: Matory. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 385S
386S. Women and Visual Media Studies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 389S; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 338S
387. Moral Panics, Spectacle, and Everyday Life: Social Anxieties and Minorities. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, EI Moral panic refers to the way a social order becomes hyper aware of activities of groups, objects, or 
circumstances posing a menace to accepted values. Course explores how everyday life is managed, intensified, 
and altered by moral panics’ spectacle. Sexual deviance, drugs, popular culture, disease, witch hunts, gender 
fears, etc., are not only creations of pre-existing fears, they make various kinds of sense in specific moments. 
They are how people recognize themselves and new challenges to that self. From those challenges they try to 
police others; they are public consensus-building events and the means by which we identity our fears and 
desires. Instructor: Lubiano. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 387, Literature 387
390. Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics. Seminar version of African & African American Studies 390. Topics vary from semester 
to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision 
of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and 
interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to juniors and seniors. Consent of both instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to juniors and seniors. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
397S. African Cities, Development, and Climate Change. CCI, EI, SS The displacement of sizeable 
urban populations as a consequence of climate change renders African cities sites of two contending conditions: 
the one is a prevailing sense of crisis; the other, in the form of a response, is to attend to the prevailing 
conditions of crisis. African cities are poised to mobilize not only extant forms of cultural ingenuity, but 
technological ingenuity too. Students will explore African city life from megalopolises like Cairo to threatened 
UNESCO world heritage sites like Saint-Louis, Senegal. The course reimagines terms such as “development,” 
“employment,” “infrastructure,” “sustainability,” and “citizenship.” Instructor: Makhulu. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 361S
406S. South African Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R, W Explores the last century of South African history 
through the lens of biography and autobiography. Protagonists range from little known South Africans like the 
sharecropper Kas Maine, an African prophetess, and the self-styled godfather of Soweto to political artists and 
writers. Topics also include some of the country’s most famous citizens like Nelson Mandela, Steve Biko and 
Helen Suzman. Readings are a mix of scholarly and non-scholarly writings. Some of the issues we will discuss 
include the ways in which segregation and apartheid affected people’s daily lives, ideological and programmatic 
opposition to white supremacy, and the AIDS epidemic. Instructor: Shapiro. One course. C-L: History 450S, 
Political Science 406S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 406S, Public Policy 406S, 
Cultural Anthropology 406S
407S. Capstone Seminar - Globalization: Asia and Asian America. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see History 454S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 412S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 412S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 437S
408S. Capstone Seminar: Post-Civil Rights America: The Search for Social Justice, 1968-Present. 
CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see History 482S
409. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 119

SS Global Change entails a multiplicity of environmental, social, economic, political and cultural factors that 
create challenges for development. The Global South, a vital area of the world, has been entangled in this 
vortex of global change as both catalyst and conductor of an emergent globalizing modernity. The progress of 
globalization seems beset by multiple stressors, ranging from financial crises and global recession, to climate 
change, state and non-state conflicts, free ranging terrorist aggression, and global health scares. What are the 
odds then of surviving globalization? What role do our imaginations of development play in either creating 
crises or effectively responding to them? Instructor: Crichlow. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 409, 
International Comparative Studies 409, Sociology 409, Latin American Studies 409
409S. Capstone Seminar: The Age of Jim Crow: Racial Segregation from Plessy (1896) to Brown 
(1954). CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see History 481S
410S. Black Frame: African American Documentary Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, R This course examines 
black documentary film by drawing on The Full Frame Archive Film Collection. The Full Frame Documentary 
Film Festival is the largest film festival in the United States entirely devoted to documentary film. Students 
enrolled in this class will read canonic texts on the black documentary film, study camera techniques, explore 
the history of the Full Frame Festival, critique the role of race in social justice filmmaking and interact with 
documentary filmmakers. Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 440S, Visual and Media 
Studies 410S
419S. Meaning, Mattering, and Black Being-in-the-World: Towards a Critical Theory of Race 
and Value. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see International Comparative Studies 419S; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 418S
420S. The Role of Race and Culture on Development. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 
435S
450S. The Global Caribbean. CCI, EI, R, SS The course introduces students to the Caribbean as a 
transnational space that reflects the global dynamics associated with flows of bodies via migration, labor, and 
goods all of which have undergirded the birth and evolution of the (primarily) Atlantic world economy. The 
Global Caribbean will have a historical sociological bent that frames the region as the first modern colonial 
space which has served as a template for other projects of colonial and postcolonial development elsewhere in 
the world. Emphasis will be on the way that freedoms and unfreedoms operate in the Caribbean and elsewhere. 
Discussions of how knowledge has conditioned the representation of the region will be entertained. Instructor: 
Crichlow. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 450S, International Comparative Studies 418S, Sociology 
450S, Latin American Studies 450S
451S. Capstone Seminar: African Americans and the World. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
History 484S
465S. Global Cities. CCI, EI, SS Examination of new ways of living and surviving in cities across the world—
new urbanization as distinct from the “new urbanism”—in context of the decline of the industrial economy, 
the offshoring of work, the creation of network cities and so-called “global cities.” Explores impact of increased 
urbanization, linked to “post-wage” work, informalization, and inequality. Addresses dilemmas of alternative 
forms of life through “cases,” including cities in the global North and South, varied “urban” schools, their 
theories and methodologies. Instructor: Makhulu. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 465S, International 
Comparative Studies 465S, International Comparative Studies
490. Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. One course.
491. Independent Study. See African & African American Studies 391. Consent of both instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R See African & African American Studies 393. Consent of both 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Distinction Program Sequence. R Research for the development of thesis. Open only to senior 
majors. Consent of both instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
496. Distinction Program Sequence. R Continuation of African & African American Studies 495. Open 
only to senior majors. Consent of both instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One 



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)120

course.
499S. Senior Seminar. Open to seniors majoring in African & African American Studies and to others with 
consent of instructor. Instructors: Staff. One course.
503S. Moments in Black (Radical) Theory: From Ferguson to Rhodes Must Fall to Silent Sam. 
CCI, EI, SS The time for black (radical) theory is now! This course introduces students to a series of thinkers 
connected by a set of moments and locations that demand black radical theorizing. Conjoining black radical 
traditions in the United States and South Africa, students are asked to think about contemporary political 
deadlocks in campus struggles, in the extension of those politics to the streets, in the Movement for Black Lives, 
#FeesMustFall, #RhodesMustFall, and varied organizing around the removal of monuments to colonialism, 
imperialism, slavery, and the Confederacy. Instructor: Makhulu and Winters. One course. C-L: Religion 503S, 
Cultural Anthropology 503S, Political Science 589S, International Comparative Studies 504S
510S. Global Africa. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 561S; also C-L: History 561S, 
Political Science 527S, International Comparative Studies 510S
512S. The Fetish: The Role of Things in Spiritual, Economic, and Sexual Life. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This 
course explores the social relationships produced by debates over the value and agency of material things 
ranging from the cross and the Eucharist to black leather, fur, dildos and even the more mundane commodities 
through which capitalism and socialism have defined their rivalry. Thus we will examine the highly charged 
role of things in religion, economics, and spiritualized erotic relationships, as well as the centrality of the fetish 
concept in the mutual transformation of modern Africa and the West. Instructor: Matory. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 511S, Religion 511S
515S. Race, Class, and Gender: A Social History of Modern (1750-present) Britain. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see History 505S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 509S
520S. Harlem Renaissance. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Art History 554S
530S. Third Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 613S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 613S, Latin American Studies 613S, Visual and Media Studies 611S
531S. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Art History 650S; also 
C-L: Documentary Studies
539. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images. ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 539; also C-L: 
Documentary Studies
540S. Seminar in Asian and Middle Eastern Cultural Studies. CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 505S; also C-L: Literature 530S
541S. Monuments and Memory: Public Policy and Remembrance of Racial Histories. ALP, CCI, 
EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 562S
544S. Race and American Politics. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 525S; also C-L: Public 
Policy 526S
545S. Race, Racism, and Democracy. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 535S
548S. Poverty, Inequality, and Health. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 644S
549S. Schooling and Social Stratification. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 542S; also C-L: 
Education 542S, Child Policy Research
551S. Race and Ethnicity. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 529S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 529S
575. Justice, Law, and Commerce in Islam. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 660; also C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 659, Islamic Studies, International Comparative Studies
580S. Race Theory: Biological Classification and Moral Implications. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Philosophy 539S
589S. Black Visual Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 555S
590S-5. Topics in African Art. One course. C-L: see Art History 590S-5



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 121

594S. Cultural (Con)Fusions of Asians and Africans. CCI, CZ, SS This course examines how people 
lay claims to belonging as citizens of nation-states. Focusing primarily on African and Indian descended 
populations in the Caribbean and the Pacific, we investigate how these populations invoke colonial constructions 
to reinvent themselves and work to negotiate their racialized identities in these shared communities. We will 
consider the construction of histories and explore the general cultural politics that sustain and bolster claims 
of authenticity and belonging and unbelonging within these national spaces. What sorts of sociocultural and 
political strategies are deployed by such people to exclude others even as they connect across these troubling 
divides? Instructor: Crichlow. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 594S, Latin American Studies 594S, 
Sociology 594S
610S. Africa, Cuba, Brazil: Great Powers of the Black Atlantic. CCI, CZ, SS Explores shared cultural 
history of three great populations separated by oceans but linked by slave trade. Course will offer lively, 
mutually transformative dialogue in religion, music, and political ideas. This case study in the Africanization 
of the Americas and the Americanization of Africa challenges a range of conventional assumptions about 
transnationalism, race, class, gender, and their artistic expression. Instructor: Matory. One course. C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 610S, History 610S, Romance Studies 522S
620S. AfroFuturism. ALP Explores Afrofuturism, a literary and cultural aesthetic imagining how people of 
color project themselves into narratives of the future. Investigation of Science fiction, fantasy literature, music, 
artworks, music videos, and dance to trace the concept of an Afrofuturist point of view. Creation of Afrofuturist 
media and performances. Artists considered include writers Samuel R. Delany and Andrea Hairston; musicians 
Parliament-Funkadelic and Sun Ra; filmmaker Hype Williams; performers Janelle Monae and Flying Lotus. 
Instructor: DeFrantz. One course. C-L: Dance 535S, Theater Studies 535S, Visual and Media Studies 524S
621S. Black Performance Theory. ALP, CCI, R Exploration of methods and research approaches relevant 
to the construction of black performance theory. Performance Studies methodologies undergird ways of seeing 
and modes of analysis relevant to considerations of black art, including dance, sound and music, drama, visual 
art, and aesthetics of popular culture. Instructor consent required. Instructor: DeFrantz. One course. C-L: Dance 
645S, Visual and Media Studies 621S
622S. Black Sonic Culture—Analog to Digital. The course will examine the production, reproduction and 
distribution Black (African Diasporic) “Sound”--inclusive of, but not exclusive of various musical cultures--in 
the creation of Black Sonic Culture(s) that were in conversation with and counter to Black Literary Culture, 
Black Visual Culture and Black Performance traditions. The course, in particular, will examine the impact on the 
transition from analog sound to digital sound. Instructor: Neal. One course. C-L: English 691S, Literature 691S, 
Music 691S
640S. African Cities. CCI, SS If the predominant mode of development in African cities is informal and 
unplanned giving rise to new modes of life, livelihood, and leisure beyond the organizing infrastructures of 
formal architecture and design in reality, the new African urbanism seems to give rise to two distinct conditions 
of life--the one crisis and the other ingenuity. This course is concerned to think through the paradox of rapid 
urban growth across the continent--from Lagos and Cairo to Johannesburg and Cape Town--and the fact that 
such rapid urban growth is taking place without the conventional facilities, infrastructures and technologies. 
Instructor: Makhulu. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 562S
641S. Citizen and Subject in a Neoliberal Age. CCI, EI, SS Explores studies of citizenship, quests to 
belong to a place, and institutional mechanisms people deem sacred, and others, profane and dispensable. 
Focuses on the ways African, Caribbean and Pacific peoples have adapted identitarian constructions to develop 
narratives of home. Case studies using ethnographic, historical, sociological and visual methods are used to 
investigate how particular claims are pursued in clamoring for citizenship in various communities. Instructor: 
Crichlow. One course. C-L: Sociology 645S, Cultural Anthropology 641S
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 645S; 
also C-L: Economics 541S, Sociology 642S, Political Science 642S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 642S, Human Rights
643S. Black Women, Black Freedom. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examination of struggles for freedom, from 
nineteenth century through twenty-first, particularly through the lives of black women. Drawing on women’s 
history, literature, art, performance and critical theory, students interrogate meaning of various freedoms, 
including civic and sexual. Objective is to discern a working definition for “black freedom” by centering women 



 African & African American Studies (AAAS)122

in struggles for black liberation. Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Art History 643S
645S. African Modernities. CCI, SS Encounters between African societies and global forces, including 
colonialism, capitalism, development initiatives. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 560S, 
International Comparative Studies
646. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 
SS Global Change entails a multiplicity of environmental, social, economic, political and cultural factors that 
create challenges for development. The Global South, a vital area of the world, has been entangled in this 
vortex of global change as both catalyst and conductor of an emergent globalizing modernity. The progress of 
globalization seems beset by multiple stressors, ranging from financial crises and global recession, to climate 
change, state and non-state conflicts, free ranging terrorist aggression, and global health scares. What are the 
odds then of surviving globalization? What role do our imaginations of development play in either creating 
crises or effectively responding to them? This course is the same as African & African American Studies 409 but 
with additional graduate level work. Instructor: Crichlow. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 
647, Sociology 647
660. Health in the African Diaspora. CCI, EI, SS, STS Exposes and explores the individual and joint 
contributions of biological and non-biological factors to health and wellbeing in peoples from various regions 
and countries of the African Diaspora. The course draws on a variety of disciplines, modes of inquiry, and health 
problems in comparative analyses of genetic, historical, political, and sociocultural dimensions of the African 
Diaspora. Course content is not limited to the transatlantic African Diaspora; it spans multiple African Diaspora 
streams. Instructor: Royal. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 660, Global Health 672
690. Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S. Special Topics. Seminar version of African & African American Studies 690. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Science & Society 590S-1
699S. Gateway/Proseminar. The proseminar is the required gateway course in the AAAS Certificate 
Program. It is designed to introduce students to the broad interdisciplinary scope of advanced scholarship in 
black diasporic studies globally. Students will learn interdisciplinary and cross disciplinary research methods, 
including awareness of archival, bibliographic, and qualitative/quantitative methods. The history of the field and 
its unique influence on the production of humanistic and social scientific knowledge are also significant concerns 
in the course. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major
The major requires ten courses, eight of which must be at the 200 level or above. Students may choose one 

of the two following options.
A. The Americas Focus 
Major Requirements:
• African & African American Studies 102 and 103
• Three courses focusing on the Americas, one course in each of the following Areas of Knowledge:

• Arts, Literatures, and Performance (ALP)
• Civilizations (CZ)
• Social Sciences (SS)

• African & African American Studies 499S (Senior Seminar)
• Four additional African & African American Studies courses
B. Africa Focus 
Major Requirements: 
• African & African American Studies 102 and 103
• Three courses focusing on Africa, one course in each of the following Areas of Knowledge:

• Arts, Literatures, and Performance (ALP)
• Civilizations (CZ)
• Social Sciences (SS)

• African & African American Studies 499S (Senior Seminar)
• Four additional African & African American Studies courses



African & African American Studies (AAAS) 123

The Minor
The minor requires five courses, two of which must be African & African American Studies 102 and 103.
Minor Requirements: 
• African & African American Studies 102 and 103
• Three additional courses at 200 level or above, in or cross-listed with African & African American 

Studies. Both program foci (Africa and the Americas) must be represented across the three-course 
selection. These courses must each fulfill one of the following Areas of Knowledge:
• Arts, Literatures, and Performance (ALP)
• Civilizations (CZ)
• Social Sciences (SS)

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The program offers work leading to Graduation with Distinction. See the section on honors in this bulletin 

and contact the director of undergraduate studies.

Foreign Languages
The program recommends that majors complete at least two years of college-level study, or its equivalent, of 

a foreign language. Students interested in additional study of African or Diaspora cultures are strongly encouraged 
to study an African or Caribbean language. 

Animal Behavior
For courses in animal behavior, see Biology on page 209.

Anthropology
See the departments of Evolutionary Anthropology (on page 387) and Cultural Anthropology (on page 

261).

Arabic
For courses in Arabic, see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 175.

Art, Art History & Visual Studies
Professor Dillon, Chair; Assistant Professor of the Practice Olson, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Profes-
sors Dillon, Forte, Hansen, Jaskot, McWilliam, Morgan, Powell, Seaman, Stiles, Van Miegroet, Weisenfeld, and 
Wharton; Research Professors Lasch and Szabo; Professors of the Practice McIver and Rankin; Associate Pro-
fessors Abe, Cobb, Gabara, and Galletti; Associate Professors of the Practice Gibson and Kaul; Assistant Profes-
sor Caviglia; Assistant Professors of the Practice Olson, Salvatella de Prada, and Wendell; Adjunct Professors 
McHugh and Price 

A major and/or a minor is available in art history, visual arts, art history/visual arts, visual and media 
studies, cinematic arts, and photography through this department.

Art History
Art history is the study of works of art in the context of the broader social, political, and intellectual cultures 

of which they are a part. Studying art history develops the ability to evaluate and organize information, visual as 
well as verbal; it also enhances the faculties of creative imagination, precise observation, clear expression, and 
critical judgment. Students of art history acquire a sophisticated understanding of the theory and practice of 
artistic production and reception.



 Art History (ARTHIST)124

A major or second major in art history provides basic training for those interested in teaching, museum and 
gallery work, art publishing, and advertising; the major also furnishes an appropriate background for graduate 
training in architecture. Art history’s emphasis on careful observation, the ordering of diverse sorts of information, 
expository writing, and scholarly research makes it a good general preparation for any profession.

Courses in Art History (ARTHIST)
20. Basic Art History. Credit for Advanced Placement on the basis of the College Board examination in art 
history. Does not count toward the major in art history or design. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101D. Introduction to the History of Art. ALP, CCI, CZ The history of western architecture, sculpture, 
and painting in a cultural context from prehistory to the Renaissance (c. 1400). Instructor: Staff. One course.
102D. Introduction to World Art History from 1200 to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ An expansive 
investigation of the history of art, from the Renaissance to the present, including non-Western visual traditions, 
art historical methods and theories placed in dynamic interdisciplinary dialogues across the humanities, social 
sciences, and sciences, and involving wide perspectives, intersecting ideas, and the capacity to observe works of 
art in museums, galleries, and installations throughout the world. Instructor: Stiles and Huffman. One course.
103D. Introduction to the History of Architecture. ALP, CZ The survey provides a panorama of 
architectural production from Antiquity to the present with a global perspective. The objective is to insure 
knowledge of architectural production, related historiography, contemporary debate, and scholarship. The 
reading materials are organized chronologically to facilitate the students’ approach to the field of architectural 
history. A thematic approach will inform the lectures, where notions of practice, techniques, spread of 
knowledge and models among others, are considered in relation to specific case studies. Instructor: Galletti or 
Jaskot. One course.
104. Exploring Art and Architecture - Foundations and Histories. ALP Provides knowledge for 
developing skills in visual analysis and historical interpretation of art from antiquity to present; examines major 
theoretical frameworks, key movements and concepts; explores how we look at and talk about works of art, 
investigating a variety of approaches to their study, including artists and their material practices; biography, 
patrons and the public; built environment and cultural institutions; how the social and political roles of art 
change through time. Taught in Nasher Museum. Classroom discussions complemented by visits to Nasher 
galleries and direct practice of visual analysis, critical theory, and role of changing histories in comprehension of 
art. Instructor: Staff. One course.
107. Roman Art and Archaeology. ALP, CZ Roman artistic legacy shaped Western art in profound ways. 
Artistic innovations: realistic portraiture, trompe l’oeil wall painting; architectural innovations: amphitheater, 
circus, multi-seat latrine, steam-heated bath. Explore Roman art and architecture throughout Mediterranean 
from late Republic to early fourth century AD. Emphasis on social and cultural contexts. Study major technical 
and aesthetic innovations, and impact of Roman emperors as art patrons. Class lectures and readings arranged 
both chronologically and thematically, with case studies of archaeology of Pompeii, Athens, Aphrodisias in 
Turkey. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 107
185FS. The Languages of Art. ALP, CCI, CZ How meaning is communicated by a work of art. Interpretive 
strategies. Visual languages developed and used by different societies. Relationship between visual and verbal 
languages, texts and images. Study of Semiotics and Iconology. Open only to students in the Focus Program. 
Instructor: Kachurin. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Art History. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Topics in Art History. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines, art-historical 
areas, and visual culture. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Art History. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines or art-
historical areas. Instructor: Staff. One course.
196. Etruscans: Myth, Archaeology and Civilization. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 241
197A. Visual Culture Outside the United States, I. ALP, CZ Course in the visual arts and/or architecture 
taught in Duke programs abroad. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Art History (ARTHIST) 125

198A. Visual Culture Outside the United States, II. ALP, CZ See Art History 197A. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
202. Imagining Europe: Arts, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see French 429; also 
C-L: Literature 274, Visual and Media Studies 202
205. The Aegean Bronze Age. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 352
206. Early Greek Archaeology: From the Fall of Mycenae to the Persian Wars. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Classical Studies 344
207. Classical Greek Archaeology, Archaic to Classical. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 348
208. Art and Archaeology of Ancient Athens. ALP, CCI, CZ Monuments, archaeology, art, and 
topography of ancient Athens from the Archaic to the Roman period. Examination of the physical remains of 
the city and countryside to trace the development of one of the most important city-states in the Greek world 
and to understand its impact on western civilization. Case study in understanding the role of archaeology in 
reconstructing the life and culture of the Athenians. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 248
209A. Rome: History of the City. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 340A; also C-L: 
History 238A
210. The Art of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ Explores profound influence of Greek and Roman artistic 
legacy on Western art. Innovations include portrait, Baroque style, large-scale painting, public baths, theater. 
Explore art and architecture of Greece and Rome in social and cultural context, including major technical 
and aesthetic innovations. Role of artistic agency and patronage. Starts with the Classical age and ends with 
Christian emperor Constantine. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 250
213S. Feminist Art from the 1970s to the Present. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 213S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 213S
215S. Representations of Women in the Classical World. ALP, CCI, CZ, W The lives of women in 
the Classical world viewed through the visual culture of Classical art. Through images of women in statues, 
reliefs, coins, and painting, the course explores the role of visual representation in communicating complex 
social and political messages. Issues such as the construction of gender, the expression of power and status, 
the preservation of social hierarchies, the protection of normative values, and the manipulation and control of 
sexuality are considered. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 243S, Visual and Media Studies 
209S
220. Museum Theory and Practice. ALP, R Introduction to museum theory and the operation, with a 
particular focus on art museums. How theory and practice is negotiated in real world settings. Issues involve 
collecting practices, exhibition practices, and interpretive techniques, as well as legal and ethical issues. Taught 
at the Nasher Museum. Instructor: McHugh. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
221S. The Museum Object: Art and Artifact on Display. ALP Technical study focusing on the material 
properties of artifacts and the technologies of art-making. Collection, exhibition, care, storage, handling, 
preservation, and conservation of objects in context with anthropological theory and legal and ethical 
considerations. Instructor: McHugh. One course.
222S. History and Theory of Curatorial Practice. ALP An inquiry into the rise of the curatorial discipline 
by tracing its history and theoretical underpinnings. Primary emphasis on contemporary art and examination 
of various approaches to curatorial practice including curating in a global context, the rise of the biennial, 
performance art and non-traditional venues, as well as curatorial critique. Readings will be drawn from a range 
of popular and academic sources. Instructor: Price. One course.
225. Gothic Cathedrals. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Great cathedrals of Europe in England, Germany, and Italy, with 
a special focus on France, from roughly 1140 to 1270, and their construction, financing, and role in the fabric 
of medieval city life. The urban context of each city, the history of the site and its relics, and the artistic and 
technological developments that made the construction of these complex and large-scale structures possible. 
A consideration of Romanesque precedents and the origins of the various structural elements of Gothic 
architecture. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 215



 Art History (ARTHIST)126

227. Medieval Castles of Europe. CZ, STS This course will examine the transition of Western Europe into a 
fortified landscape from the mid-11th century until the advent of large-scale artillery in the mid-15th century. In 
addition to tracking technological and stylistic changes over time, this course will identify the discrete elements 
of fortification that were combined into a variety of castle plans. Natural resources and physical topography will 
emerge as central factors in the choice of site and design for medieval castles. As a way of investigating these 
topics, students will digitally reconstruct a historical or imagined castle in 3D graphics at a specific place and 
time covered in the course. Instructor: Triplett. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 226
231. History of Art Markets. R, SS, STS Analytical survey of emergence of art markets, interactions 
between market behavior(s), visual/media culture(s). Addresses questions regarding the nature of art markets, 
the specificity of art markets and the application of economic and historical methodologies, how and where 
players in local markets throughout the world shape visual culture(s), effective causes for art consumption, taste, 
fashion throughout ages, and methodological implications of art market research at interface of Economics, Art 
History, Law and Visual Studies. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Economics 344, Visual and Media 
Studies 242
231D. History of Art Markets. R, SS, STS Analytical survey and discussion of emergence of art markets, 
interactions between market behavior(s), visual/media culture(s). Addresses questions regarding the nature 
of art markets, the specificity of art markets and the application of economic and historical methodologies, 
how and where players in local markets throughout the world shape visual culture(s), effective causes for 
art consumption, taste, fashion throughout ages, and methodological implications of art market research at 
the interface of Economics, Art History, Law and Visual Studies. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: 
Economics 344D, Visual and Media Studies 242D
232. Japanese Art, 1600 to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Japanese visual culture from the end of 
the sixteenth century to the contemporary period encompassing the country’s unification under Tokugawa 
rule and later emergence on the world stage through painting, sculpture, architecture, ceramics, decorative 
arts, photography, and print media. The relationship between artistic production and Japanese sociopolitical 
development seen through the critical issues of religion, region, gender, class, and nationalism. Ethical questions 
surrounding the establishment of the Japanese colonial empire in Asia, the Pacific War, the atomic bombings 
of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the internment of Japanese-Americans in the United States, and the American 
Occupation of Japan. Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
234. Japanese Architecture. ALP, CCI, CZ A survey of major architectural traditions of Japan. Sites 
ranging from prehistoric tombs and dwellings to contemporary design work of architects such as Isozaki Arata 
and Ando Tadao. Focus on the development of various architectural typologies: Buddhist temples, Shinto 
shrines, tea ceremony structures, garden design, imperial and shogunal palaces, fortified castles, modern 
institutional structures, and private residences. Japanese architectural practices compared with other Asian 
and Euro-American building traditions. Aesthetic, structural, historical, social, and religious issues considered. 
Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 250
238. Science Fiction Film. ALP, CCI, EI, STS One course. C-L: see English 386
244D. From Caricature to Comic Strip. ALP, CCI History of caricature as a medium for political critique 
and social comment from the eighteenth century to the present, focusing on England, France, Germany, and 
the United States. Languages of graphic satire in the context of specific historical moments, from the War of 
Independence to the war in Iraq; history of popular journalism and the comic press; censorship and agitation 
for press freedom; cartooning and the assault on power; violence against cartoonists and issues of freedom of 
speech; growth of specialized juvenile graphic magazines and the development of the strip cartoon. Instructor: 
McWilliam. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 244D
245S. Women in Visual Arts. ALP, CZ Through lectures, discussion and individual projects, this course 
considers the roles women have played in the art world—alone and in relation to men—as makers, subjects, 
patrons, and critics. It also explores issues of gender, masculinity and femininity. Students will also have the 
opportunity to work on selected objects at the Nasher as well as the Ackland Museum. Instructor: Caviglia. One 
course. C-L: Visual Arts 245S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 245S
246. Roman Archaeology: Origins to Empire. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 246
251. Art and Christianity: A History of Christian Visual Culture. ALP One course. C-L: see Religion 
250



Art History (ARTHIST) 127

254. Renaissance Architecture: A European Perspective. ALP, CZ Surveys panorama of European 
architectural theory and production in fifteenth and sixteenth centuries within a broad geographical area 
including Italy, France, Spain, Germany, Poland, the Low Countries, and England. Course objectives are to 
insure knowledge of Renaissance architectural production, related historiography, and contemporary debate 
and scholarship as well as develop students’ analytical and research skills. Reading materials organized 
chronologically to facilitate students’ approach to the field of architectural history, while a thematic, case-study 
based approach will prevail in class. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 244
255. Art in Renaissance Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ The course provides a panorama of Italian Renaissance 
art including theory, painting, print, sculpture, and architecture. The objectives are to ensure knowledge of 
Renaissance artistic production and related historiography and to develop students’ analytical and research 
skills. Materials are organized thematically around notions of artistic training and workshop practice, 
techniques, centers of production, art markets, antiquarianism and collections, patronage, gender, artistic 
rivalry, dissemination of knowledge, relationship with the spectator, social structures, sacred and secular spaces 
and objects, among others, which will be considered in relation to specific case studies. Instructor: Galletti. One 
course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 225, Italian 386
255A. Renaissance and Baroque Art History. ALP, CCI, CZ Introduction to the development of 
painting, sculpture, and architecture in Rome from the fifteenth to the early seventeenth centuries, focusing 
on the patronage of the Popes and the Papal court. Consent required. (Taught at the Intercollegiate Center for 
Classical Studies in Rome.) Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 229A
255FS. Art in Renaissance Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ The course provides a panorama of Italian Renaissance 
art including theory, painting, print, sculpture, and architecture. The objectives are to ensure knowledge of 
Renaissance artistic production and related historiography, and to develop students’ analytical and research 
skills. Materials are organized thematically around notions of artistic training and workshop practice, 
techniques, centers of production, art markets, antiquarianism and collections, patronage, gender, artistic 
rivalry, dissemination of knowledge, relationship with the spectator, social structures, sacred and secular spaces 
and objects, among others, which will be considered in relation to specific case studies. Open only to students 
in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 225FS, Italian 386FS
256. Italian Baroque Art. ALP, CCI, CZ This course will trace the development of the Italian baroque 
in architecture, sculpture and painting. It will consider a variety of themes relevant to Baroque artistic 
production, including religious influences on the art of the period, namely the Reformation and the Catholic 
Counter Reformation; economic influences; central versus peripheral locations; issues of gender and sexuality; 
patronage; architectural site and meaning; urban planning and transformation; the artist, his workshop and 
rivalries; decoding the myths of artistic genius; and seventeenth-century primary sources. Instructor: Lanzoni. 
One course. C-L: Italian 256, Romance Studies 256, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 246
258. Renaissance Architecture in Italy: Brunelleschi to Michelangelo. ALP, CZ Architecture, 
design, theory, engineering, construction, and the related arts, 1400-1600. The architectural production of the 
Italian Renaissance in its historical, cultural, social, and economic context. Contributions of individual masters, 
including Brunelleschi, Alberti, Bramante, Leonardo, Raphael, Michelangelo, Palladio. Emphasis on architecture 
in Florence and Rome. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Italian 258, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 227
259. Michelangelo in Context. ALP, CCI, CZ Historical and cultural contextualization of the work 
of Michelangelo Buonarroti (1475-1564), painting, sculpture and architecture. History, historiography, 
contemporary debate and scholarship concerning his work of artistic training and workshop practice, 
techniques, centers of production, art markets and consumption, antiquarianism and art collections, patronage, 
identity, gender, artistic rivalry, spread of knowledge and models, relationship with the spectator, social life, 
sacred and secular spaces and objects. Field trip to the Metropolitan Museum of Art collection of Renaissance 
architectural drawings and prints in New York. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Italian 261, Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 233
261. The Contemporary Art Market. ALP, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 343; also C-L: Markets 
and Management Studies
262A. History of Netherlandish Art in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ See Art History 506A. 
(Taught in the Netherlands.) Not open to students who have taken 506A-507A. Course credit contingent 



 Art History (ARTHIST)128

upon successful completion of Art History 263A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 242A, Visual and Media Studies 262A, International Comparative Studies
263A. History of Netherlandish Art in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ See Art History 507A. 
(Taught in the Netherlands.) Not open to students who have taken 506A-507A. Second half of Art History 
262A-263A; required for credit for 262A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 243A, Visual and Media Studies 263A, International Comparative Studies
265. Drawing Foundations in Early Modern Europe. ALP Through classroom lectures, museum visits, 
and studio practice, this course studies the place of drawing since its early modern theorization in the visual arts 
and in the artistic practice. Drawings can be records of visual observation, or of a speculative thought process; 
ways of working out ideas, and of presenting plans; they also achieve the status of independent art objects. 
Students will gain familiarity with drawing as an artistic medium related to major questions about art and 
society, while also learning fundamental and practical drawing skills that will give deeper insights into theory. 
Instructor: Caviglia, Fick. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 256, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
240
268. Art & Architecture in Early Modern France. ALP, CCI, CZ A survey of French art and architecture 
in the early modern period, including castles, churches, prints & drawings, paintings, sculpture, and the 
decorative art objects considered in their social, economic, and political context; focus on 1422-1643; three 
thematic sections, organized chronologically: art and architecture relating to ceremonies and festivals, domestic 
and urban life, and worship to draw out relevant themes in the creation and use of works of art; programmed 
visits to Duke’s Rubenstein Rare Books Room and Nasher Museum of Art to view some of these objects. 
Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: French 268, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 245
278. European Art 1760-1850. ALP, CCI, CZ The roots of modernity in European art: classicism, 
romanticism, and early realism. Impact of the enlightenment and French Revolution on European visual 
culture. Emergence of new publics for art and beginnings of a modern art market. Role of tradition: the impact 
of antiquity, northern legends and the middle ages. Religiosity and personal mythologies. Changing conceptions 
of nature, the body and artistic creativity. Artists include Blake, Fuseli, Turner, the Pre-Raphaelites, David, 
Ingres, Delacroix, Runge, Friedrich, the Nazarenes, Goya. Instructor: McWilliam. One course. C-L: Romance 
Studies 278, International Comparative Studies
279. European Art 1850-1900. ALP, CCI, CZ The second half of the nineteenth century in Europe with 
particular emphasis on realism, impressionism, postimpressionism, and symbolism in France, England, and 
America. Instructor: Antliff, McWilliam. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 279, International Comparative 
Studies
280. European Art 1900-1945. ALP, CCI, CZ Major artistic movements and theoretical aims of early 
modernism: fauvism, cubism, expressionism, futurism, constructivism, suprematism, dada, surrealism, deStijl, 
Bauhaus, and Neue Sachlichkeit in France, Italy, Germany, America. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Italian 
384, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 281
281S. Modernism and the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see English 282S; also C-L: German 282S, 
Romance Studies 282S, Literature 282S
283. African American Art. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Emphasis on works derived from an Afro-United States 
cultural perspective. Major figures include Henry Ossawa Tanner, Aaron Douglas, Jacob Lawrence, Charles 
White, Elizabeth Catlett, Romare Bearden, Lois Mailou Jones, and others. Instructor: Powell. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 227
284. The Political History of Modern Architecture: From Revolution through Neoliberalism. 
ALP, CCI, CZ Given the needs for labor, materials, and legal permissions, architects in the modern period by 
definition intersect with interests of power. This course explores the role of political institutions and ideologies 
in the history of modern architecture. While the course focuses on European and North American examples, 
we will also include key case studies of non-Euroamerican architecture and politics. The course provides a 
foundational knowledge of the history of modern architecture as well as how political institutions and ideologies 
have influenced that development. Instructor: Jaskot. One course. C-L: History 263, Political Science 263, 
Public Policy 287
285D. Modern Architecture. ALP, CCI, CZ The history of European and American architecture from 



Art History (ARTHIST) 129

eighteenth-century Neo-Classicism through Gothic Revival, Art Nouveau, and Arts and Crafts to the early 
twentieth century Bauhaus. Labrouste, Richardson, early Wright, and LeCorbusier among the architects 
considered. Instructor: Wharton. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 231D
286. Contemporary Architecture. ALP, CCI, CZ Examination of the Bauhaus through Corporate 
International Style as a background to the Postmodern core of the course. Later Wright and LeCorbusier, Gehry, 
Graves, Eisenman, Disney Imaginers among the architects and designers considered. Political, ideological, 
aesthetic, and technical aspects of building investigated through primary texts. Instructor: Wharton. One course.
286D. Contemporary Architecture. ALP, CCI, CZ Examination of the Bauhaus through Corporate 
International Style as a background to the Postmodern core of the course. Later Wright and LeCorbusier, Gehry, 
Graves, Eisenman, Disney Imaginers among the architects and designers considered. Political, ideological, 
aesthetic, and technical aspects of building investigated through primary texts. Instructor: Wharton. One course.
288. Dada and Surrealism. ALP, CCI, CZ The origins, aims, literature, and politics of the international 
movements of dada and surrealism, which flourished between the world wars, examined in the light of dada and 
surrealist theory, literature, and art. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
290. Special Topics in Art History. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290-1. Topics in Medieval Art and Architecture. Specific problems dealing with contextual and cultural 
issues in medieval art and architecture from c. 300 to 1400. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 290-1
290A-1. Topics in Italian Art and Architecture. Topics vary from year to year. Consent of instructor 
required. (Taught in Italy.) Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Art History. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
292. Independent Study. See Art History 291. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by 
consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Research Independent Study. R See Art History 293. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by 
consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295. Chinese Art 1900 to Present. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Study of selected works of Chinese art and visual 
culture (painting, sculpture, architecture, video, performance, and installation art; fashion design and cinema) 
from 1900 to the present. Emphasis on the visual analysis of objects as well as their social and historical 
context. Instructor: Abe. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 150, Visual and Media Studies 294, 
International Comparative Studies
296A. Berlin: Architecture, Art and the City, 1871-Present. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
German 322A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
297A. Art and Architecture of Berlin, Fifteenth to the Twentieth Century. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Introduction to the visual arts of Germany from the fifteenth to the twentieth century through lectures 
conducted in Berlin’s museums and cultural institutions. German Old Masters, German Romantic and Realist 
artists, Modernist art movements, such as Expressionism and New Objectivity, considered in relation to 
upheavals in modern German history. Taught in English in the Duke-in-Berlin summer program. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: German 365A
298. History of Impressionism. ALP, CCI, CZ The evolution of the impressionist movement and 
postimpressionist reactions of the 1880s. Particular attention to the work of Manet, Degas, Monet, Renoir, and 
Pissarro. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
303. History of Photography, 1839 to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ Major artists and movements in 



 Art History (ARTHIST)130

the history of the photographic medium, including visual and critical traditions inherited and manipulated by 
photographers, the ways photography participated in nineteenth- and twentieth-century art movements as well 
as documentation and social change, and critical photographic discourse throughout this period. Topics include 
the invention of photography, ‘Art’ photography and documentary photography in the nineteenth century, 
pictorialism, ‘straight’ and purist photography, photography and modernist art movements (dada, surrealism, 
Bauhaus, Russian avant-garde), twentieth-century documentary, and photography of the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, 
1980s, and 1990s. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 303, Documentary Studies 303, 
International Comparative Studies 352
304. Cubism and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ Development of cubism from its origins in Paris in 1907 to the 
movement’s decline in the 1920’s. Cubist aesthetics is contextualized in light of the cultural politics of the period. 
Topics may include tradition, primitivism, and anti-colonialism, anarchism and politics, approaches to collage, 
contemporary philosophy and science, and the role of gender in Cubist aesthetics. Instructor: Antliff. One 
course.
305L. Virtual Museums: Theories and Methods of Twenty-First-Century Museums. ALP, R, 
STS The future of museums will be one of immateriality and interaction. Course focuses on how the “Internet of 
Things,” augmented reality technologies, new data analyses of artifacts will transform missions, roles, and goals 
of museums and collections. Core of course will be digital lab sessions focused on virtual reconstruction of lost 
heritage—e.g., museums and sites destroyed and damaged by ISIS and other conflicts in Iraq and the Middle 
East (Hatra, Nineveh, Nimrud, Baghdad). Instructor: Forte. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 305L, Visual and 
Media Studies 332L, Information Science + Studies 305L, Classical Studies 240L
306. Why Buildings Stand Up: A History of Construction Techniques from Antiquity to 
Modernity. CZ, STS The course provides a panorama of construction techniques from antiquity through 
modernity, spanning a broad geographical area, including Europe, the Mediterranean Basin, and Asia. The 
objective of the course is to ensure knowledge of different construction materials, techniques, and processes 
as well as to develop students’ analytical and research skills. Course materials will be organized thematically in 
sections dealing with building materials, such as wood, stone, bricks, concrete, steel, and reinforced concrete, 
as well as with structural choices, such as skeletal versus massive, hanging versus supporting, which will be 
discussed in relation to specific case studies. Instructor: Galletti. One course.
310. Museum Practicum I. ALP Museum work in the context of art-historical, ethical, philosophical, and 
economic issues related to the presentation of art in museums. Under direction of museum staff students engage 
in practicum to gain first-hand knowledge of museum operations. Museum Practicum requires weekly meeting 
plus five hours per week working in assigned department, additional readings and assignments. Production 
of exhibition reviews, sample exhibition writing, blog posts, and final presentations. Instructor: McHugh. One 
course.
311. Museum Practicum II. ALP Additional depth or breadth of experience in museum work in the context 
of art-historical, ethical, philosophical, and economic issues related to the presentation of art in museums. 
Under the direction of museum staff, students engage in practicum to gain first-hand knowledge of museum 
operations. Museum Practicum II requires eight hours per week working in assigned department, additional 
readings and assignments. Students produce documents related to a museum department. Prerequisite: Art 
History 310. Instructor: McHugh. One course.
312A. Internship in New York. One course. C-L: see English 313A; also C-L: Theater Studies 214A, Visual 
and Media Studies 296A
312A-1. Internship in New York. C-L: see English 313A-1; also C-L: Theater Studies 214A-1, Visual and 
Media Studies 296A-1
313A. The Business of Art and Media. One course. C-L: see English 310A; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 301A
315. Mapping History with Geographic Information Systems. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 315; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 304
317. The Body in Art in Early Modern Europe: Power and Limits of Corporeal Representations. 
ALP, CCI, CZ This course studies the artistic representations of the human body in many guises: aesthetic, 
political, social, cultural, and erotic. It analyses the different strategies artists deployed to develop rhetorics 



Art History (ARTHIST) 131

of the body both physical and emotional. It considers different media (including painting, sculpture, 
drawings, prints, architecture, and gardens) and major theoretical frameworks (including feminist theory, 
phenomenology, social theory and somaesthetics). This course considers the body dynamically through 
composition, as object of investigation, as locus of meaning and through social understanding. Lectures and 
discussions are complimented by corporeal performances and improvisations. Instructor: Caviglia. One course. 
C-L: Romance Studies 317, Dance 317, Theater Studies 245, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 217
318SA. New York Scenes. ALP, R One course. C-L: see English 315SA; also C-L: Theater Studies 218SA, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 315SA, African & African American Studies 318SA, Jewish Studies 
315SA
334. Roman Spectacle. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Gladiatorial games, wild beast hunts, elaborately-staged 
executions of condemned criminals, and chariot racing as some of the most popular forms of public 
entertainment in the Roman world. The ritual of these entertainments and spectacles, the circumstances of 
and occasions for their performance, and the form and elaboration of the venues—the amphitheater, the circus, 
the theater, and the stadium—in which they took place. Visual and literary representations of these spectacles. 
Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 334, Classical Studies 354
336. Pilgrimage and Tourism. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, W Investigation of pilgrimage and tourist destinations 
(Jerusalem, Rome, Santiago, Orlando, New York) from the Middle Ages to the present through a study of their 
material remains, primary sources and theoretical texts. Discussion of the moral and ethical issues involved in 
marketing authenticity from a cross-cultural and comparative perspective. Evaluation based on weekly student 
written assessments of the texts and the presentation of a pilgrimage site of their choice. Instructor: Wharton. 
One course. C-L: Religion 260, Visual and Media Studies 336
338. Paris: A City and its Culture 1850-1930. ALP, CCI, CZ The development of Paris, from the major 
remodeling initiated under the Second Empire to the advent of modern style in the interwar years, focusing 
on the changes in architecture and planning which transformed the French capital into a model of urban 
modernity. The city as a physical environment that has to be understood in terms of varied populations, 
transport systems, economic activities, and cultural representations. The role played by visual arts in shaping 
the city, recording its appearance and interpreting its meanings, together with Paris’s role as a environment 
favoring cultural production and exchange. Instructor: McWilliam. One course.
340S. Classical Sculpture. ALP, CZ, W Statues were the “other population” of Greece and Rome. Portraits 
of athletes, generals, kings, emperors lined streets and filled markets. Why? What do statues do for people 
setting them up, for people viewing them? Seminar explores place of statues in Greek and Roman society, and 
relationship between context, style, and meaning. Course approaches material thematically and contextually. 
Particular attention paid to changing physical, cultural, historical, political contexts in which statues were set 
up and in which they continued to operate for centuries. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Dillon. One 
course. C-L: Classical Studies 346S
341A. Art, Cultural Identity, Social Change: Political History of Cont Spanish Art: Goya to Global 
Society. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 341A
342A. Dante and the Art of Hell. ALP, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 342A; also C-L: Literature 342A, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 342A
343SA. Conservation and Management of the Material Heritage. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 343SA
344. Performance Art History and Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Performance Art History and 
Theory explores cultural experimentation, theoretical strategies, and ideological aims of performance art 
internationally; examines interchanges between artists’ theories of performance, stylistic development, and 
impact in the context of cultural criticism and art history; traces interdisciplinary genealogies of performance 
globally; thinks about the body as a vehicle for aesthetic expression, communication, and information in its 
critique of social and political conditions; studies performance and gender, sexuality, race, and class; asks 
how performance alters the semiotics of visual culture and contributes to a paradigm shift from modernism 
to postmodernism. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 344, Information Science + 
Studies 275, Literature 222, Theater Studies 235, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 276
345. African Art: From Royal Court to Contemporary Marketplace. ALP, CCI, CZ Explores 



 Art History (ARTHIST)132

traditional, modern, and contemporary African art from the ever-shifting perspectives of prestige, power, 
and identity. The conceptual framework guiding this survey is both a broad introduction to the major artists 
and artworks of Africa across millennia, as well as probing specific questions about the changing definitions 
of African art, individual versus state identities in African art, and the impact of religion, colonization, and 
trade/commerce on African art. Instructor: Powell. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 348, 
International Comparative Studies 223
347. Roman Coinage: The Materiality of an Ancient Economy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 357
350. Representing the Artist in Film and Popular Culture. ALP Cultural constructions of the artist and 
the art world, using fictional and documentary film as starting point; the artist in literature; popular conceptions 
of artistic biography, mentality, and lifestyle—genius, gender, sexuality, madness, bohemianism; relationship 
between images of the artist in popular culture and methods within academic art history; the artist in cinema 
from Michelangelo to Warhol. No prerequisites. Instructor: McWilliam. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 343
354SL. Digital Art History I: New Representational Technologies. Research and study in material 
culture and visual arts expressed by using new visual technologies to record and communicate complex sets 
of visual and physical data from urban and/or archaeological sites. Introduces techniques for presentation 
and interpretation of visual material through a series of interpretive and reconstructive technologies, 
including development of web pages, timelines, Photoshop, Illustrator, Trimble SketchUp, Google Maps, GIS. 
Uses test cases (archaeological site or urban/architectural site) to develop techniques of interpretation and 
representation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 365SL
360D. What Is Beauty?. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 360D; also C-L: Literature 362D, 
English 362D
378. Chinese Buddhist Art. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Chinese sculpture, painting, and architecture in relation to 
Buddhist texts, practice, and ritual from the fourth through the ninth century C.E. Introduction to precedents 
in Indian and Central Asian Buddhist art. Emphasis on the relationship between Buddhist and non-Buddhist 
imagery. Instructor: Abe. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 378
381D. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Major avant-garde movements of the post-World War II 
era, with a concentration on the unprecedented changes in the mediums of art, its forms, impact on society and 
politics, and ethical role in shaping culture through painting and sculpture, conceptual and performance art, 
installation and new media, video, photography, and film. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 277D, International Comparative Studies 219D, Visual and Media Studies 382D, Ethics 
Elective
381S. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Major avant-garde movements of the post-World War II 
era, with a concentration on the unprecedented changes in the mediums of art, its forms, impact on society and 
politics, and ethical role in shaping culture through painting and sculpture, conceptual and performance art, 
installation and new media, video, photography, and film. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 277S, International Comparative Studies 219S
383. The Black Atlantic. ALP, CCI, CZ The African diaspora—a direct result of the transatlantic slave trade 
and Western colonialism—has generated a wide array of artistic achievements, from the “shotgun” houses of 
New Orleans to the urban graffiti of NYC. The course surveys several major cultural groups in West and Central 
Africa and their aesthetic impact on the arts, religions, and philosophies of peoples of African descent in South 
America, the Caribbean, and the United States. Instructor: Powell. One course. C-L: African & African American 
Studies 329, International Comparative Studies 226
384. Art of the United States. ALP, CZ, EI Course introduces the major art forms and aesthetic theories 
developed in the US from colonial period to present. Emphasis on architecture, painting, sculpture, graphic, 
and decorative arts. Structured chronologically, this course defines the characteristics of the different historical 
periods and the ways American artists both adopted and diverged from other models to create their own 
distinctive national identity. Instructor: Powell. One course.
390. Special Topics in Art History. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Art History (ARTHIST) 133

390-1. Topics in Renaissance Art. Specific problems dealing with the iconography, style, or an individual 
master from c. 1300 to 1600. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 390-1
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Art History. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Art History. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines or art-
historical areas. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SL. Special Topics in Art History and Digital Visualization. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace 
a range of disciplines of art-historical areas and the visualization of this information or material culture through 
digital technologies. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395S. Art History Methodology and Theory. ALP, CZ Undergraduate course discussing various 
theoretical approaches that have shaped disciplinary perspectives and practices in art history. Introduction 
to particular types of methodologies (e.g. Marxism, feminism, race and gender, psychoanalysis, post-colonial 
theory, and deconstruction) as fields of inquiry through which the study of the visual arts and culture have been 
practiced. Historiography of art history; selected contemporary debates. All seats in all sections reserved for Art 
History majors and second majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
432S. From the Art of the Pleasure Quarters to Tokyo Pop. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Starting in the 
bordellos of 17th-century Edo (now modern-day Tokyo) and spanning up through the kitsch of contemporary 
Japanese pop culture, this course examines the vibrant and often bawdy forms of Japanese print and visual 
culture. Introduction to Japanese printmaking practices and a forum for discussing critical issues related to 
sexuality, censorship, spectacle, satire, tourism, the supernatural, and the Asian experience of modernity. 
Investigates the spectacular worlds of the kabuki theater, sumo wrestling, and the “pleasure quarters” (the red-
light district designated for licensed prostitution). Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 432S
433S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. 
C-L: see Spanish 433S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 459S, Visual and Media Studies 433S, Latin 
American Studies
453S. World of Gaming: Art, Theory, Technology, and Business of a Multi-Billion Dollar Global 
Industry. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 455S; also C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 455S, Literature 455S
454SL. Digital Art History II: New Representational Technologies Advanced. Team-based research 
and study in material culture and visual arts expressed by using new visual technologies to record, interrogate, 
and communicate complex sets of visual and physical data from urban and/or archaeological sites. More 
advanced techniques for presentation and interpretation of visual material through a series of interpretive and 
reconstructive technologies. Use test cases (archaeological site or urban/architectural site) to further develop 
techniques of interpretation and representation. Public facing presentation of data and results of research is aim 



 Art History (ARTHIST)134

of final team-based project. Prerequisite: Art History 354SL/Visual and Media Studies 365SL. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 454SL
455S. Curatorial Practicum: Exhibition Development and Design. ALP The conceptualization and 
execution of museum exhibitions. Exploring theory and practicalities of exhibition conception, strategies, and 
approaches. Development of full exhibition proposals including checklists, exhibition text, exhibition design, 
fundraising, audience engagement, and programming. Visits to regional museums and galleries. Prerequisites: 
ARTHIST 310 and one of the following: ARTHIST 220, ARTHIST 221S or ARTHIST 222S. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
460S. World War I and the History of Art & Architecture: Germany and Beyond. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Grounds the student in a thorough history of World War I and its impact on the arts in Germany, from the 
outbreak of war in 1914 through the 1918 Revolution and up to the 10th anniversary of war (1924). Compares 
this history with select examples from France, the Soviet Union, Italy, and elsewhere. Instructor: Jaskot. One 
course. C-L: German 460S, History 452S
489S. Capstone in Art History. ALP, CZ, EI, R Advanced seminar for Majors in Art History focusing on 
issues of history, presentation and display of art works. Working in and around the permanent collection at the 
Nasher Museum, projects involve researching specific works within the collection, devising new labeling and 
displays, conceiving small thematic exhibitions. Course challenges students to apply theoretical and historical 
knowledge accumulated in the Major in the practical environment of the museum. Instructor consent required. 
Prerequisite: Art History 101D, 102D or 104. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490-1. Topics in Nineteenth-Century European Art. Focus on a major aspect of nineteenth-century 
European art. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490-2. Topics in Twentieth-Century Art (TOP). Focus on a major aspect of twentieth-century European 
art. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490-3. Topics in Contemporary Art. Focus on a major aspect of contemporary European art. Subject varies 
from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490-4. Topics in History of Photography. Focus on periods, cultures and major ethical, social and political 
issues in the history of the photographic medium. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics. Focus on particular aspects of Art and Art History. Topics vary. Instructor consent 
required. Topics course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. Consent 
of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
492. Independent Study. See Art History 491. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Art History 493. Open only to qualified students in the senior 
year. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Honors Thesis Workshop. ALP, R, W Research and writing skills for students completing an 
honors thesis; bibliography, library and on-line research; use of archives; picture research and other research 
skills relating to the history of art; organization of material and preparation for writing; drafting, editing, and 
production of a finished text; use of scholarly conventions of referencing, footnoting etc. Compulsory for seniors 
preparing a graduation with distinction dissertation in art history. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Visual Arts 495S, Visual and Media Studies 495S
501S. Greek Art and Society: Archaic to Classical. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Main categories of buildings, 
monuments, and images most characteristic of ancient city life in fifth and fourth centuries BCE. Range of 
material studied: city plans, temples, statues, reliefs, painted pottery. Emphasis on archaeological and historical 



Art History (ARTHIST) 135

contexts; questions and themes concern relation of new forms of public building and representation to 
changing historical circumstances. Fifth century made decisive break with archaic visual modes; area of special 
investigation is swift emergence and consolidation of revolutionary way of seeing and representing known as 
‘classical art’. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 541S
502S. Greek Art: Hellenistic to Roman. ALP, CCI, CZ Seminar explores art of Greek East from 300 B.C.E 
to 300 C.E.; emphasis on understanding and analyzing production, style, materials, functions. Sculpture made 
for Hellenistic kings and cities, and changes in sculptural production with Roman conquest and imperial rule. 
Main categories of evidence: funerary monuments, portrait statues, heroic groups in baroque style, Dionysiac-
themed decorative sculpture. Issues of stylistic categories, periodization, meaning and interpretation, theoretical 
perspectives expressed in ancient literary texts, and current scholarly debates and trends in study of Hellenistic 
and Roman art in a Greek context form an integral part of the seminar. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: 
Classical Studies 542S
503S. Ancient Spain and Portugal: The Roman Provinces of the Iberian Peninsula. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 546S
504SL. Building Duke: An Architectural History of Duke Campus from 1924 to Today. ALP, 
R Research seminar and laboratory on the architectural history of Duke Campus based on original archival 
materials (photos, blueprints, contracts, letters, and financial records) preserved in Duke Library collections. 
Explores the variety of interpretative lenses in the field of architecture history, including, but not limited to, 
issues of style, patronage, labor, class, gender, and race. Analyzes notions of cultural identity as construed by 
Duke founders and administrators, and as imprinted on Duke Campus by its architects and landscape designers. 
Original research projects based on primary materials and digital visualizations of changes in the physical fabric 
of Duke Campus through time. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Historical and Cultural Visualization 504SL
505S. Visual Studies from the Global South. ALP, CCI, CZ, R This seminar shifts the geography 
of critical theory, introducing interdisciplinary approaches to visual culture and art formulated outside the 
northern academies of Europe and the United States. Diverse readings introduce how the visual is constituted 
in sites that have endured colonialism and globalization. Specific topics include: word and image; space, place, 
and site; media and new technologies; indigenous and Afro-diasporic philosophies; and the raced and gendered 
body. Instructor: Gabara. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 505S, Romance Studies 505S
506A. History of Netherlandish Art and Visual Culture in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, R A 
contextual study of visual culture in the Greater Netherlands and its underlying historical and socioeconomic 
assumptions from the late medieval to early modern period, through immediate contact with urban cultures, 
such as Amsterdam, Leiden, Utrecht, Brussels, Ghent, Bruges, and Antwerp. Includes daily visits to major 
museums, buildings, and sites; hands-on research in various collections; discussion sessions with leading 
scholars in the field; and a critical introduction to various research strategies. (Taught in the Netherlands.) Not 
open to students who have taken Art History 262A-263A. Course credit contingent upon completion of Art 
History 507A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 504A, Visual and 
Media Studies 506A, International Comparative Studies
507A. History of Netherlandish Art and Visual Culture in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R Second half of Art History 506A-507A; required for credit for 506A. (Taught in the Netherlands.) Not open 
to students who have taken Art History 262A-263A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 505A, Visual and Media Studies 507A, International Comparative Studies
508S. Art and Markets. ALP, CCI, R, SS Cross-disciplinary art history-visual culture-economics seminar. 
Analytical and applied historical exploration of cultural production and local art markets, and their emergence 
throughout Europe, Asia, and the Americas. Criteria for valuation of imagery or what makes art as a commodity 
desirable or fashionable. Visual taste formation, consumer behavior, and the role of art dealers as cross-cultural 
negotiants. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
567S, Economics 321S, Markets and Management Studies
509S. Mimesis in Theory, Embodied Practice, and Literary Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: 
see French 507S; also C-L: English 581S, Literature 507S
515S. Representing Architecture: Means and Methods. ALP, R Projects- and skills-based studio course. 
Exploration of the historical and contemporary techniques and technologies used to visualize, communicate and 



 Art History (ARTHIST)136

document, built/historic, proposed or hypothesized architecture and its construction. Focus on its application 
for art, architectural history and the humanities, as well as architectural design training. Topics covered 
include hand sketching, ortho/perspective representation, 2d CAD, 3d modeling and potential explorations of 
3d immersion/VR or 3d printing/model-making. Presented in a series of short, topic-based studio exercises 
culminating in a final project, which may relate to the student’s research interests. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 515S, Historical and Cultural Visualization 515S
520S. Roman Provincial Archaeology: The West. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 547S
522S. Curatorial Practices in a Global Context. ALP History and critical theories of all experimental art 
from conceptual, performance, and installation to video and multimedia, collectives, and ecological and bioart 
considered in a global context including international exhibitions, biennials, and new curatorial practices. 
Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 522S
535S. Camera Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Examines how the art and technology of photography have 
changed how we study and understand the historical past, with a focus on China, India, and Japan. Analyzes 
arrival of the camera as a historical event, along with photographers and studios. Evaluates ways in which the 
new technology was embraced, and considers how the camera reconfigured attitudes towards the body and 
gender relations, nation building, war, catastrophes and death. Instructor: Weisenfeld and Ramaswamy. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 535S, History 530S, International Comparative Studies 531S
536S. Technology and New Media: Academic Practice. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Information 
Science + Studies 540S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 562S
537S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar. ALP, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 650S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 650S, Literature 621S, 
Visual and Media Studies 561S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
539. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images. ALP, EI This course interrogates still and moving images 
by and about people of African descent. Students enrolled in this course will consider film, photography, 
and media art. Together, we will examine documentary film, daguerreotype and archival photography, black 
cinema, and the cultural politics that render production, reception and circulation particular for black subjects. 
Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 545, African & African American Studies 539, 
Documentary Studies
540S. Topics in Nineteenth-Century Art. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Focus on a major artist, movement, or 
trend in nineteenth-century art. Subject varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
McWilliam or staff. One course.
542S. Information Archeology: Studies in the Nature of Information and Artifact in the Digital 
Environment. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 680S; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 569S
543S. Methodology of Art History. ALP, CZ, R, W Various theoretical perspectives that have shaped 
disciplinary perspectives and practices in art history. Introduction to particular types of methodologies (i.e. 
Marxism, feminism, race and gender, psychoanalysis, post-colonial theory, and deconstruction) as fields of 
inquiry through which the study of the visual arts and culture have been practiced. Historiography of the last 
two decades in art history; selected contemporary debates. Instructor: Staff. One course.
544S. Soviet Art after Stalin 1956-1991. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Russian 561S
545S. The Archaeology of Death: Ritual and Social Structure in the Ancient World. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 543S
546S. The American Artist. ALP, CZ, R, W This course utilizes art-historical methodologies as tools 
for critical inquiry and scholarly research on one American artist (selected as per this seminar’s scheduling 
every four years). Apart from a firm biographical and art-historical grasp of the specific American artist under 
investigation, the goal of this course is to develop visual literacy of American art through seeing and writing. 
An emphasis will be placed on improving various forms of written art discourse (i.e., descriptive, expository, 
interpretative, etc.) Instructor: Staff. One course.
547L. Introduction to Digital Archaeology. CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 544L; also 



Art History (ARTHIST) 137

C-L: Information Science + Studies 544L
548S. Japanese Design in a Global World. ALP, CZ, STS Japanese design encompasses everything 
from sushi to Hello Kitty—from Shiseido to Nintendo. This course examines the diverse and vibrant spheres 
of contemporary Japanese design culture across the globe. It is both an introduction to design practices and a 
forum for the critical evaluation of theoretical issues related to the larger field of design. Exploring the diverse 
fields of fashion, graphic design & packaging, industrial design, corporate branding, culinary culture, robotics, 
electronics, gaming, animation, and toys, the class will be introduced to the global impact of Japanese design 
on daily life around the world and the dynamic transnational culture in which it participates. Instructor: 
Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 548S
549S. Roman Coinage: The Materiality of the Roman Economy. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 540S
551SL. Advanced Digital Art History: New Representational Technologies. ALP, CZ, STS Research 
and study in material culture and the visual arts expressed by using new visual technologies to record and 
communicate complex sets of visual and physical data from urban and/or archaeological sites. Introduces 
techniques for the presentation and interpretation of visual material through a series of interpretative and 
reconstructive technologies, including the development of web pages (HTML/Dreamweaver), Photoshop, 
Illustrator, Google Sketch-up, Google Maps, and Flash. To develop techniques of interpretation and 
representation. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Dillon, Olson, or Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 551SL, Information Science + Studies 551SL
552. Creative Industries and the Urban Environment. SS This Bass Connections course examines 
the relationship between urban development and cultural production in specific contemporary and historical 
contexts, past and present. Cultural industries generally include printing, publishing and multimedia art, 
audiovisual, phonographic and cinematographic productions, as well as art creation, marketing and design 
and local art markets in the urban environment. The aim is to analyze the impact of creative industries on the 
economic development of a city and what one can learn from historical and present-day examples through the 
analysis of data. Analytical methods, theories and practices will be interwoven throughout the course. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 542, Information 
Science + Studies 552
553S. Principles of Roman Archaeology. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 551S
554S. Harlem Renaissance. ALP, CCI, CZ, R The art and culture that was produced by and about 
African Americans (largely in the western metropoles) during the period roughly between the two world wars. 
Chronological overview, a focus on individual figures, and study of the criticism and creative writings of this 
period. Other topics include black migrations to urban centers, performance-as-a-visual-paradigm, racial and 
cultural primitivism, and an alternative, African American stream of early twentieth-century visual modernism. 
Instructor: Powell. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 520S
555S. Art and the Holocaust: Architecture, Art, and Cultural Politics during the Nazi Period. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, EI This course will analyze the history of the genocide of the European Jews, and its connection 
to antisemitic art and cultural policy during the Nazi period. With a sound understanding of the development of 
oppressive policies against the Jews, and looking at a variety of media (painting, architecture, film, photography, 
design), the course will explore the complicated relationship between developing racist policies and the world 
war as they impacted and were in turn influenced by artists. Examines not only artists involved in the Nazi 
state, but also those who resisted in exile or were its victims. Instructor: Jaskot. One course. C-L: German 565S, 
Jewish Studies 555S, History 531S, Visual and Media Studies 525S
557S. Trauma in Art, Literature, Film, and Visual Culture. ALP, CZ, EI Theories of trauma applied to 
visual representations of violence, destruction, and pain in contemporary art, film, and literature, examining the 
topic through multiple subjects from the Holocaust, cults, gangs, racism, and sexual abuse to cultures of trauma. 
Theories of trauma examined from a variety of sources including clinical psychology, cultural and trauma 
studies, art, film, and literature, aiming to enable students to gain the visual acuity to identify, understand, and 
respond to traumatic images with empathy. Not open to students who have previously taken this course as Art 
History 295S. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 557S
558S. Spatial Practices. ALP, CCI, CZ, R How space works from medieval refectories to Starbucks, 



 Art History (ARTHIST)138

from Jerusalem to Las Vegas, from mikvaot to hot spring spas. Consideration of space through theoretical 
texts, including Lefebvre, Habermas, Eliade, Zizek, and mapped on specific historical landscapes. Consent of 
instructor required: preference given to students earning concentration in architecture. Instructor: Wharton. 
One course.
560SL. Roman Topography: Urban Life and Cityscapes in Ancient Rome. CCI, CZ, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Classical Studies 556SL; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 570SL
561. Etruscan Cities. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 560
580S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 1. ALP, STS Interactivity and online content 
management through databases, collaborative blogs, and other systems. Data visualization based on textual, 
image, and quantitative sources. Basic techniques for virtual reality, simulations, augmented reality, and 
game-based historical and cultural visualization project development. Mini-projects based on existing and new 
research data from the Smith Media Labs and other sources. Best practices for digital research project planning 
and collaboration. Theoretical topics include: critical digital heritage, virtuality and culture, information 
aesthetics, hypermedia information design. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson or Szabo. One course. 
C-L: Historical and Cultural Visualization 580S, Visual and Media Studies 580S, Information Science + Studies 
580S, Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 580S
581S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 2. ALP, STS 2D and 3D imaging, modeling; 
raster and vector graphics sources, laser scanners, photogrammetric software, basic database structures. 
Digital mapping and GIS. Presentation strategies and best practices for the web (standards-compliant 
HTML/CSS/Javascript), multimedia (audio/video/animation), scholarly annotation, intellectual property. 
Theoretical, ethical issues in field of new media and digital humanities. Epistemological issues re: mediation and 
visualization, ethics of intellectual property, politics of geospatial visualization, digital materiality, affordances of 
new media narrativity. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson or Szabo. One course. C-L: Historical and 
Cultural Visualization 581S, Visual and Media Studies 581S, Information Science + Studies 581S, Computational 
Media, Arts & Cultures 581S
590S. Special Topics. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines or art-historical areas. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-1. Special Topics in Greek Art. Problems and issues in a specific period or genre of Greek material 
culture. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 590S
590S-11. Special Topics in Greek Archaeology. One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 590S-1
590S-3. Topics in Romanesque and Gothic Art and Architecture. Analysis of an individual topic. 
Subject varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 590S-1
590S-4. Topics in Italian Renaissance Art. Topics in art and/or architecture from c. 1300 to c. 1600. 
Subject varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 590S-2
590S-5. Topics in African Art. Specific problems of iconography, style, connoisseurship, or a particular art 
tradition in African art. Subject varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Powell. One 
course. C-L: African & African American Studies 590S-5
590S-6. Topics in Chinese Art. Problems and issues in a specific period or genre of Chinese art. Specific 
focus varies from year to year. Instructor: Abe. One course.
590S-7. Topics in Japanese Art. Problems and issues in a specific period or genre of Japanese art. Specific 
focus varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course.
590S-8. Topics in Modern Art. Selected themes in modern art before 1945, with emphasis on major 
movements or masters. Subject varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Stiles. One 
course.
590S-9. Topics in Art since 1945. Historical and critical principles applied to present-day artists and/or 
movements in all media since World War II. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies



Historical and Cultural Visualization (HCVIS) 139

590SL. Special Topics in Roman Archaeology. One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 590SL
620S. Models: Premodern to Posthuman. ALP, CZ, R Architectural models may be either powerful 
small-scale prototypes for buildings or weak copies of powerful archetypes. Consideration of variety of 
architectural models from urban projects to dollhouses allows historical and theoretical exploration of models’ 
agency. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Wharton. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 620S
630S. Phenomenology and Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 630S; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 630S, Visual and Media Studies 630S
632S. Whitehead, Bergson, James. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 632S; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 632S, Visual and Media Studies 632S
643S. Black Women, Black Freedom. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 643S
650S. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images. ALP, CCI This course interrogates still and moving 
images by and about people of African descent. Graduate students enrolled in this course will consider 
film, photography, and media art. Together, we will examine documentary film, daguerreotype and archival 
photography, black cinema, and the cultural politics that render production, reception and circulation particular 
for black subjects. Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 650S, African & African 
American Studies 531S, Documentary Studies
691. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open to qualified students by consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Historical and Cultural Visualization

Courses in Historical and Cultural Visualization (HCVIS)
504SL. Building Duke: An Architectural History of Duke Campus from 1924 to Today. ALP, 
R Research seminar and laboratory on the architectural history of Duke Campus based on original archival 
materials (photos, blueprints, contracts, letters, and financial records) preserved in Duke Library collections. 
Explores the variety of interpretative lenses in the field of architecture history, including, but not limited to, 
issues of style, patronage, labor, class, gender, and race. Analyzes notions of cultural identity as construed by 
Duke founders and administrators, and as imprinted on Duke Campus by its architects and landscape designers. 
Original research projects based on primary materials and digital visualizations of changes in the physical fabric 
of Duke Campus through time. Instructor: Galletti. One course. C-L: Art History 504SL
515S. Representing Architecture: Means and Methods. ALP, R Projects- and skills-based studio course. 
Exploration of the historical and contemporary techniques and technologies used to visualize, communicate and 
document, built/historic, proposed or hypothesized architecture and its construction. Focus on its application 
for art, architectural history and the humanities, as well as architectural design training. Topics covered 
include hand sketching, ortho/perspective representation, 2d CAD, 3d modeling and potential explorations of 
3d immersion/VR or 3d printing/model-making. Presented in a series of short, topic-based studio exercises 
culminating in a final project, which may relate to the student’s research interests. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 515S, Art History 515S
580S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 1. ALP, STS Interactivity and online content 
management through databases, collaborative blogs, and other systems. Data visualization based on textual, 
image, and quantitative sources. Basic techniques for virtual reality, simulations, augmented reality, and 
game-based historical and cultural visualization project development. Mini-projects based on existing and new 
research data from the Smith Media Labs and other sources. Best practices for digital research project planning 
and collaboration. Theoretical topics include: critical digital heritage, virtuality and culture, information 
aesthetics, hypermedia information design. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson or Szabo. One course. 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 580S, Information Science + Studies 580S, Art History 580S, Computational 
Media, Arts & Cultures 580S
581S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 2. ALP, STS 2D and 3D imaging, modeling; 
raster and vector graphics sources, laser scanners, photogrammetric software, basic database structures. 



 Visual Arts (ARTSVIS)140

Digital mapping and GIS. Presentation strategies and best practices for the web (standards-compliant 
HTML/CSS/Javascript), multimedia (audio/video/animation), scholarly annotation, intellectual property. 
Theoretical, ethical issues in field of new media and digital humanities. Epistemological issues re: mediation and 
visualization, ethics of intellectual property, politics of geospatial visualization, digital materiality, affordances 
of new media narrativity. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson or Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 581S, Information Science + Studies 581S, Art History 581S, Computational Media, Arts & 
Cultures 581S
613S. Computational Media Studio in Advanced Digital Practice. ALP, STS Advanced digital 
practicum in interactive computational media as vehicle for creative and critical expression. Opportunity to 
synthesize previous course work in multimedia practice, web/graphic/motion design, 3D modeling/gaming, 
computer programming. In-depth exploration of computational media production as artistic practice through 
exercises, projects, and critiques. Acquisition and refinement of expertise in procedural and object-oriented 
programming, two- and three-dimensional graphics, data visualization, physical computing, AR/VR, and other 
emergent computational platforms. Sustained engagement with computational ethics. Instructor: Olson, Szabo, 
Wendell. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 613S, Information Science + Studies 613S, Computational 
Media, Arts & Cultures 613S

Visual Arts
Studio art courses offer directed experiences in the practice of the visual arts, enhancing the understanding 

of art both within the history of culture and as an individual human achievement. Department offerings 
emphasize the analysis and articulation of visual concepts and processes as they relate to a broader education in 
the humanities and sciences.

Courses in Visual Arts (ARTSVIS)
21. General Art, Studio. Credit for advanced placement on the basis of the College Board examination in 
Studio Art. Does not count toward the major in visual arts. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Book Art: Form and Function. ALP Studio course examining all aspects of bookmaking, including 
theories of bookmaking, designing and planning, typography, computer design, illustration, and binding. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 101
107L. Design Fundamentals. ALP This course introduces the theory and practice of the fundamentals of 
design. Students explore critical thinking, visual literacy, elements and principles of design, color, composition, 
typography and other design topics to lay a basic foundation in the visual arts. Through lectures, readings and 
exercises students gain knowledge of visual concepts and vocabulary, explore formal elements and principles of 
design, analyze iconic design to understand what makes it great, and experience different physical and digital 
media. Hands-on assignments will inspire students, and challenge them to explore the practice of design and 
art, and to work towards successful solutions through experimentation. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One 
course.
115S. Introduction to Black and White Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
115S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 115S
119S. Introduction to Digital Photography. ALP An emphasis on digital photography, using the camera as 
a distinctive way of seeing and knowing. Class assignments accompanied by historical and theoretical readings, 
lectures, class discussions, and field trips. Final projects include thematic photographic series and an individual 
documentary essay. Prerequisites: camera and consent of instructor. Instructor: Rankin. One course. C-L: 
Documentary Studies 119S
120. Compositional Painting. ALP Studio practice in painting with individual and group criticism and 
discussion of important historical or contemporary ideas. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 199. Instructor: McIver. One 
course.
130. Experimental Drawing: Image and Bit Play. ALP Approaches the creation of digital image-
making in collective play. Includes individual and group brainstorming using different digital and traditional 
analogue processes (drawing, painting, and collage) to study how the ludic (play) enables creative thinking and 



Visual Arts (ARTSVIS) 141

experimentation in digital image manipulation. Database of images presented from multiple genres. Students 
work on outside assignment critiqued at end of class. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 131
135. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP This course explores ideas surrounding the 
creation of experimental sculpture. Employs non-traditional methods: “readymades,” non-traditional materials, 
conceptual processes, digital interaction and fabrication techniques (rapid prototyping), mixed media including 
video, and projection technologies. Content of work driven by individual student interests—sustainability, the 
anthropocene, feminism, social and political commentary, and/or more formal, abstract sculptural relations. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 135, Dance 
135, Visual and Media Studies 135
140. Create, Innovate, Act: Creativity, Innovation, and Social Action. ALP Introductory course 
for first and second year undergraduates. This course bridges sciences, arts, and humanities, with focus on 
experiential knowledge and engagement with the everyday. Combines methods from broad range of areas 
based on creative inquiry and innovation. Students chose particular areas, or combination thereof, discussing 
their own research, inventions, artworks, compositions, performances, new media, or activist interventions. 
Specific skills developed at specialized maker spaces, labs, and studios. With exception of guest presentations, 
lectures delivered in video format to maximize class time production. Guest speakers include artists, activists, 
innovators, entrepreneurs, curators, and scholars. Instructor: Lasch. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
140, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 140
160A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Projects in Visual Arts. ALP Projects differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
171SA. Capturing the City: Documentary Photography in Berlin. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 171SA; also C-L: German 222SA, Visual and Media Studies 171SA
190FS. Topics in Visual Arts. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace art and visual culture. Open only to 
students in the Focus program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
198. Experimental Interface Design. ALP, STS Class explores issues surrounding embodied approaches 
to interface design. Articulates methodology for generating new forms of human/computer interface; includes 
workshops, discussions, student presentations, critiques and group brainstorming sessions. Content related to 
biomimetics; haptic body knowledge; multi-modal sensing; physical computing; physical | digital relationships; 
networked relations; the potentials of virtual space and different qualities of space, both visual and sonic. 
Database potentials discussed and explored in service of developing new approaches to interface. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Seaman/Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 198, Information 
Science + Studies 198
199. Drawing. ALP Drawing as integrative tool where ideas and processes are explored and expanded through 
a variety of media. Still life, figure, landscape, architecture. Representation, abstraction, and working from 
imagination. Through problem solving within a range of projects, development of a visual language, and drawing 
skills to be applied to conceptual, visual, and technical disciplines. Instructor: Staff. One course.
202. Figure Drawing. ALP The human figure through different artistic media and from different visual 
perspectives. Emphasis on drawing and design skills and an anatomical knowledge of the human form. A 
significant body of drawings is developed in this class. Prerequisites: Visual Arts 199 and consent of instructor 
based on portfolio. Instructor: Staff. One course.
203. Introduction to Architectural Design. ALP Introduction to architectural design: space making with 
emphasis on process, abstraction, and modes of representation. Drawing conventions, orthographic projection, 
model building, rendering, digital technologies as forms of visual inquiry. Tectonics, space, scale, and material 
as ensemble parts of project presentations to represent ideas as well as artifacts. Final projects on building 
program and architectural issues: threshold, view, entry. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
204S. Medicine and the Vision of Documentary Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary 
Studies 206S; also C-L: Public Policy 377S, Visual and Media Studies 204S
205. Intermediate Drawing. ALP, R Allows students to explore their artistic interests and biases through a 



 Visual Arts (ARTSVIS)142

series of self-directed projects. Both the directness and the flexibility of the medium of drawing are investigated. 
Prerequisites: Visual Arts 199 and consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
206. Digital Imaging. ALP Photoshop and Illustrator used to introduce single and serial images for print and 
web output. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 206, Documentary Studies, Information Science + Studies
208S. The Silent Film: An Introduction. ALP, STS The first thirty-five years of cinema as an emerging art 
form and mode of communication. Aesthetic, technical, and cultural aspects of the medium will be considered 
in historical context, from nineteenth-century experiments to nascent narrative conventions and the first 
disruptive avant-garde movements. Focus is on close reading of relevant films. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 208S, Documentary Studies 208S
209. 3D Modeling and Animation. ALP Basic concepts of 3D modeling and animation; fundamentals of 
computer geometry; knowledge of basic tools of 3D software (Maya); introduction to modeling, animation, 
texturing, lighting, and rendering; combination of these techniques in a final project. Recommended 
prerequisite: Visual and Media Studies 206 or 396. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 351, Information Science + Studies 209
210. Sculpture. ALP Sculptural principles, processes, and issues introduced through lectures, readings, studio 
assignments, individual projects, and field trips. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
211. Intermediate Sculpture. ALP Studio practice in sculpture at the intermediate level. Group and 
individual discussion and critique. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 210 and consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
212FS. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, EI One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 209FS; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 212FS, Education 209FS
212S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, EI One course. 
C-L: see Documentary Studies 209S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 212S, Education 209S, Information 
Science + Studies
216S. Documentary Photography and the Southern Culture Landscape. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 215S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 215S
220. Intermediate Painting. ALP Learn to paint with oil paint, using a primary palette and mixing 
secondary colors. Work from observation and learn how to see color. Paint still lives, self-portraits, interior 
spaces and exterior spaces. Course may be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 120. This requirement 
can be waived by the instructor. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: McIver. One course.
222S. The Photographic Portfolio. ALP Students actively seek specific photographic territory to explore 
and build a body of work. The resulting images are extensively work-shopped for sequencing. Particular 
emphasis on the making of high quality prints. Semester culminates in the production of finished portfolios in 
three formats: a printed form, a digital form, and an exhibition or installation form. Each student’s evolving 
body of work to be informed by relevant precedents from the history of photography. These are brought into 
discussions of the work as the semester progresses, with an emphasis on examining bodies of photographic 
work that communicate something larger than a single idea. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Documentary Studies 222S 
223. Graphic Design in Multimedia: Theory and Practice. ALP Design history and theory. Lectures and 
projects focused on direct interaction with digitized elements of historically significant designs. Design elements 
and principles. Comparison of the language and tools of old and new media. Analysis of visual materials, 
discovering conceptual and stylistic connections, including Illustrator and Photoshop. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 396, Information Science + Studies 396
224. Printmaking: Silkscreen. ALP, R The silkscreen medium and its stencil-making processes including 
paper stencils, blockouts, crayon, and photographic methods. Students develop a significant body of prints using 
these techniques. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
221
226. Printmaking: Relief and Monotype. ALP, R Relief methods of woodcut and linoleum block printing 
and monotype techniques. Concentration on both the technical and historical aspects of the media and their 



Visual Arts (ARTSVIS) 143

expressive potentials. Students develop a significant body of prints using these techniques. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
229S. Experimental Filmmaking. ALP The history of avant-garde in film and video combined with 
production exercises. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 229S
232S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
230S; also C-L: Public Policy 389S, Visual and Media Studies 224S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
233S. Costume Design. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 261S
234S. Scene Design. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 262S
235S. Lighting Design. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 263S; also C-L: Dance 276S
237. Book Art: Typography as Image. ALP Investigates use of text as vehicle for communication and visual 
form within book format. Typography, interaction of writing and page design, history of typography, writing and 
printed page, use of written form as work of art, book design, binding and how text as visual element interacts 
with and becomes the image. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 201 preferred. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 243
238. Digital Printmaking: Exploring Photo Silkscreen and Photoshop. ALP Explore different facets 
of photo-silkscreen process through development of digital imagery using a variety of digital approaches. 
Application of paralleling layering approaches found in image development and printing methods with image 
development in Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator, combining handmade and photo-silkscreen stencil-making 
methods. Different digital image making methods and silkscreen printing techniques in addition to serial image 
development. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 224 preferred. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
240S. Color Photography: Fieldwork and Digital Color. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
236S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 227S
242L. Interactive Graphics: Critical Code. ALP, QS Introduction to interactive graphics programming 
for artists. Explores object-oriented programming via the Processing programming environment as well as 
historical and theoretical appreciation of interactivity and computer graphics as artistic media. Combines 
discussions of key concepts from the readings with hands-on Processing projects and critiques. No previous 
programming experience or prerequisites required. Enrollment limited to 15 students. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 397L, Information Science + Studies 294L, Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies
245S. Women in Visual Arts. ALP, CZ Through lectures, discussion and individual projects, this course 
considers the roles women have played in the art world—alone and in relation to men—as makers, subjects, 
patrons, and critics. It also explores issues of gender, masculinity and femininity. Students will also have the 
opportunity to work on selected objects at the Nasher as well as the Ackland Museum. Instructor: Caviglia. One 
course. C-L: Art History 245S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 245S
248S. Cinematography. ALP In-depth investigation of cinematographic techniques and principles 
for motion picture production. Exercises in both film and high definition digital video. Emphasis on 
advanced lighting techniques, lensing, camera mobility, set operations and close analysis of master works of 
cinematography. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 260S, Documentary Studies 281S
249S. The Photobook: History and Practice. ALP, CCI, CZ Cultural, intellectual and artistic history 
and uses of the book in photographic practice. Traces technical, conceptual, formal innovations that mark 
international history of photography books through lectures/hands-on examination of key books, including 
lesser known innovations and uses of photobook in Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and Japan. Marries 
historical awareness with studio practice. Simultaneous immersion in production of images as well as collecting 
of archives from various cultures. Crafting of photobooks in several genres as students edit, print, scan, assemble 
materials. Seminar includes readings, discussions, short writings, field trips. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 350S, Documentary Studies 250S
254S. Photography in Context. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 245S; also C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 252S, International Comparative Studies 245S
264S. Puppetry. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 264S



 Visual Arts (ARTSVIS)144

281S. Graphic Design in Motion. Motion Design is the creation of animated graphics using graphic 
design, typography, advertising, photography, animation, sound and filmmaking. Emphasis will be on design, 
conceptualization and ability to communicate ideas and work collaboratively. Learn language and principles 
of graphic design by developing a method for solving design problems, communicating ideas effectively, and 
creating professional motion design such as title credits, logo animation, and newsreel that can be integrated 
into film, life performance or web. Photoshop, Illustrator, After Effects, video editing and 3D software will be 
used. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
281S
290. Topics in Visual Arts. Subject varies from year to year. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
290S. Special Topics in Visual Arts. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Individual Project in the Visual Arts. Individual directed study in a field of visual practice on a 
previously approved topic, under the supervision of a regular-rank faculty member, resulting in an academic 
and/or artistic product. Instructor consent required. Instructor; Staff. One course.
295S. Arts Entrepreneurship. One course. C-L: see Music 295S; also C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
295S, Dance 201S, Visual and Media Studies 295S, Theater Studies 312S, Documentary Studies 295S
303S. Writing the Short Film. ALP, W In-depth study of the short format movie. Development of short 
film concept and script, including pre-production, storyboarding, and look books. Instructor: Hawkins. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 338S
305L. Virtual Museums: Theories and Methods of Twenty-First-Century Museums. ALP, R, 
STS The future of museums will be one of immateriality and interaction. Course focuses on how the “Internet of 
Things,” augmented reality technologies, new data analyses of artifacts will transform missions, roles, and goals 
of museums and collections. Core of course will be digital lab sessions focused on virtual reconstruction of lost 
heritage—e.g., museums and sites destroyed and damaged by ISIS and other conflicts in Iraq and the Middle 
East (Hatra, Nineveh, Nimrud, Baghdad). Instructor: Forte. One course. C-L: Art History 305L, Visual and 
Media Studies 332L, Information Science + Studies 305L, Classical Studies 240L
312S. Documentary Video Production Workshop. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 312S; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 313S
316S. Activating the Archive: Archival Research as Documentary Practice. ALP, EI, R One course. 
C-L: see Documentary Studies 316S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 314S
317S. Movement in Question: Introduction to Critical Dance Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One 
course. C-L: see Dance 318S; also C-L: Theater Studies 320S
318S. Photo Workshop. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 318S; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 333S
320. Advanced Painting. ALP In advanced painting you will learn how to develop conceptual ideas by 
using the elements of art (line, color, harmony, repetition, value, texture, composition, and rhythm) to visually 
communicate. We will focus on developing meaningful paintings that conceptually address issues or ideas that 
are important to you. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 220. Instructor: McIver. One course.
322S. Motion Graphics for Film and Video. ALP, STS An exploration of techniques and theoretical 
approaches to motion graphics, animation and post-production effects in film and video. Readings and 
screenings will lead to student-produced exercises through exposure to applications in the Adobe Creative Cloud 
and digital editing software. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 322S, Documentary 
Studies 323S
325S. Visiting Filmmaker Master Courses: Special Topics. ALP One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 379S, Documentary Studies 285S
326S. Film Animation Production. ALP Experimentation with various media; mastering animation 
techniques such as metamorphosis, timing, articulation, storytelling, sound design, special effects, and camera. 
Each student to produce a one-minute animated film on the Oxberry 16mm film animation stand. Not open to 
students who have taken this course as Film/Video/Digital 102S. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 271S, Information Science + Studies



Visual Arts (ARTSVIS) 145

328. Animated Film: A History and Aesthetic. ALP, STS Evolution of animation from the philosophical 
“toys” of the late eighteenth century to the major international entertainment form of today. Special focus on 
American animation as it evolved from inspired individuals like Emile Cohl and Winsor McCay to a full-blown 
industrial model allowing for the creation of the animated feature and contemporary special effects. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 222, Information Science + Studies 211
336S. Unraveling Paradise: Examining the Mythical Ideal Through Art and Documentary of 
the Caribbean. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 336S; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 367S, Latin American Studies 336S
337S. Articles of Truth: Creating Culture through Multimedia. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 337S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 372S
340S. Producing Docu-Fiction. ALP Investigation of hybrid, genre-defying films that question traditional 
definitions of documentary and fiction. Emphasis on experimental forms, documentary reenactment, 
mockumentary and dramatized “true stories.” Exploration of both documentary and fiction production 
techniques, culminating in the production of a final video project. Instructor: Gibson. One course. C-L: 
Documentary Studies 278S, Visual and Media Studies 340S
350S. Sound for Film and Video. ALP Theory and practice of sound recording techniques and strategies 
for film and video. Focus on sound/image relationship, sound design and sound acquisition. Screenings and 
readings will reinforce practice exercises. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 353S, Visual 
and Media Studies 339S
352S. Documentary Publishing from Gutenberg to the Web: The Vanishing Point Course. ALP, 
CCI, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 352S; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 352S, Visual and Media Studies 352S
356S. 16mm Film Production. ALP Hands-on experience with 16mm motion picture film and photography. 
In-depth exploration of the techniques and aesthetics of film production, including basic screen writing, lighting, 
storytelling, and editing. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 357S, Visual and Media 
Studies 362S
357S. Multimedia Documentary: Editing, Production, and Publication. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 360S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 348S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 242S
360A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Projects in Visual Arts. ALP, 
CCI Projects differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
361S. Photographic Memory: Photo Albums, Photobooks, & Zines. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 361S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 361S
364S. Web Design and Narrative: Artists, Documentarians, Art Historians, and Entrepreneurs. 
ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 354S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 354S, Visual 
and Media Studies 364S
366S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 366S; also C-L: Public Policy 388S, History 398S, Visual and Media Studies 368S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 366S, Human Rights
368S. The View Camera: Black and White Large Format Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 368S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 373S
371S. The Choreographic Mind: Order, Disorder, Organization, Relations. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One 
course. C-L: see Dance 370S
375S. Recycled Cinema. ALP Found footage filmmaking, cinematic appropriation, the use of archival 
materials in documentaries, and current day internet mashups. Covering early cinema, experimental and 
documentary cinema, television, and the internet. Key emphasis on practice based assignments with a 
concurrent focus on the historical impact of the field from seminal moments to the contemporary moment 
through films and readings on the subject. Prerequisite: 100-level or above Visual Arts course, or permission 
of instructor. Instructor: Kaul. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 375S, Documentary Studies 375S, 
Literature 373S



 Visual Arts (ARTSVIS)146

381S. Graphic Design in Motion. ALP Motion design is the creation of animated graphics using graphic 
design, typography, advertising, photography, animation, sound and filmmaking. Emphasis will be on design, 
conceptualization and ability to communicate ideas and work collaboratively. Learn language and principles 
of graphic design by developing a method for solving design problems, communicating ideas effectively, and 
creating professional motion design such as title credits, logo animation, and newsreel that can be integrated 
into film, life performance or web. Photoshop, Illustrator, After Effects, and video editing software will be used. 
Prerequisite: one of the following: Visual Arts 102, 206, 223, or 326S, or Arts of the Moving Image 350S or 357S. 
Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 381S
390S. Special Topics in Visual Arts. Subject varies from year to year. One course. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
391. Independent Project in the Visual Arts. Individual directed study in a field of visual practice on a 
previously approved topic, under the supervision of a regular-rank faculty member, resulting in an academic 
and/or artistic product. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
426. Advanced Printmaking: The Printed Installation. ALP Students will explore how print media 
engage with physical space. Using multiples made from different print processes, students will create objects 
and installations made from their prints. Projects will evolve from constructing dimensional prints to 
collaborating to build a room installation with prints. Experimentation by printing on different surfaces is highly 
encouraged. Recommended prerequisite: prior printmaking coursework. Instructor: Fick. One course.
435. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP This course explores ideas surrounding the 
creation of experimental sculpture. employs non-traditional methods: “readymades,” non-traditional materials, 
conceptual processes, digital interaction and fabrication techniques (rapid prototyping), mixed media including 
video, and projection technologies. Content of work driven by individual student interests, sustainability, the 
anthropocene, feminism, social and political commentary, and/or more formal, abstract sculptural relations. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 436, Dance 
435, Visual and Media Studies 434
450S. Narrative Projects. ALP Development and production of short narrative film projects. Project-based 
course taking short film concepts through script development, pre-production, production and post-production. 
Prior video production experience recommended. Instructor: Haverkamp. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 450S
451S. Filming Art. ALP Practice-based production course examining the filmic realization and visualization 
of the artistic process. Screenings of bio-pics, documentaries and experimental films focusing on artists and 
various art forms complement readings and hands on production exercises that will prepare students to 
undertake their own short video portrait of an artist or work of art. Instructor: Gibson. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 451S, Documentary Studies 451S
490S. Special Topics in the Visual Arts. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual directed study in a field of visual practice on a previously approved 
topic, under the supervision of a regular-rank faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor Staff. One course.
492. Independent Study. Individual directed study in a field of visual practice on a previously approved 
topic, under the supervision of a regular-rank faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Honors Thesis Workshop. ALP, R, W Research and writing skills for students completing an 
honors thesis; bibliography, library and on-line research; use of archives; picture research and other research 
skills relating to the history of art; organization of material and preparation for writing; drafting, editing, and 
production of a finished text; use of scholarly conventions of referencing, footnoting etc. Compulsory for seniors 
preparing a graduation with distinction dissertation in art history. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Art History 495S, Visual and Media Studies 495S
496S. Visual Arts Practice and Cinematic Arts Concentration Senior Capstone. ALP Senior 
capstone seminar in advanced research in Visual Arts practice and theory, Cinematic Arts practice and theory. 
Capstone requires the completion of major research project or body of work, participation in regular critiques, 



Visual Arts (ARTSVIS) 147

and presentation of work at a capstone exhibition. Visual Arts students work in any given media or combination 
thereof. Cinematic Arts Concentration students focus on the research and/or production of works in film, 
video, animation, or any time-based media. Course is structured around joint critiques and guest presentations, 
fostering an interdisciplinary environment representative of contemporary art contexts and professional 
practice. Instructor: Gibson, Kaul, Lasch, Salvatella, Wendell. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 496S
497S. Advanced Visual Practice. ALP Majors in the fall of their senior year work on independent projects 
in a group situation. Students meet weekly with professor teaching course to discuss progress and monthly 
with full Visual Arts and Visual and Media Studies faculty for critiques. This course serves as anchor course 
for students participating in Graduation with Distinction in Visual Arts and those Graduation with Distinction 
students in Visual and Media Studies with a practice-based component to their project. Initial development of 
projects during the fall semester, brought to completion in the Capstone course in spring. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 497S
498S. Senior Capstone in Visual Practice. ALP Capstone seminar focusing on advanced visual practice 
and theory, including the completion of a body of work and participation in a culminating exhibition. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
510S. (Neosentience) Body as Electrochemical Computer. ALP, NS, R, STS Weekly discussions/
lectures related to different disciplinary understandings of the body, exploring new computational and aesthetic 
paradigms for brain/mind/body/ environment relations, and working towards articulating bridging languages 
enabling researchers to talk across disciplines. Students required to participate in ongoing discussion, develop 
particular aspects of research and write a major research paper. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 510S, Information Science + Studies 666S
515S. Representing Architecture: Means and Methods. ALP, R Projects- and skills-based studio course. 
Exploration of the historical and contemporary techniques and technologies used to visualize, communicate and 
document, built/historic, proposed or hypothesized architecture and its construction. Focus on its application 
for art, architectural history and the humanities, as well as architectural design training. Topics covered 
include hand sketching, ortho/perspective representation, 2d CAD, 3d modeling and potential explorations of 
3d immersion/VR or 3d printing/model-making. Presented in a series of short, topic-based studio exercises 
culminating in a final project, which may relate to the student’s research interests. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 515S, Historical and Cultural Visualization 515S
554S. Experimental Communities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Interdisciplinary seminar examining visual culture 
and experimental social structures. Readings across academic spectrum focusing on alternative corporate 
models and workers’ unions, early soviet social networks, neighborhood associations, anarchist communes, art 
collectives, minority alliances, reality TV, fan clubs and fundamentalist organizations, encouraging students 
to fuse theories of social change with practice to produce new social structures. Class productions may include 
research papers, performances, experimental theater, social actions, new media works, as well as conventional 
art forms. Work will be judged by its formal sophistication or aesthetic merits, its social or political relevance, 
and its engagement with methods of ethical inquiry studied throughout the semester. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Lasch. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 554S, Sociology 636S
556S. Poverty and the Visual. ALP, CCI, CZ Relationship between art, visual culture, and poverty from 
1950s to present across cultures. Readings across broad range of texts in humanities and social sciences. 
Research, visual analyses, and student productions based on a broader understanding of poverty as a 
philosophical, economic, social, and cultural concept. Three-part definition of poverty includes: special focus 
on cultural contributions of grassroots social movements and impoverished sectors of global society, poverty as 
an intentional set of aesthetic or cultural constraints, and poverty as a critical term to understand historical and 
contemporary limitations of visuality. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Lasch. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 570S, Sociology 556S
564S. Physical Computing. QS, STS Seminar in physical computing, creative coding, and the emerging 
artistic possibilities of the Internet of Things. Emphasis on the medial physicality of computation, and 
exploration of interfaces to the computational that depart from the keyboard, mouse, and screen. Discussion 
of the social implications of “smart” objects. Hands-on development of individual and group projects using 
Arduino, an extension of C/C++, internet-enabled microprocessors, and an array of analog and digital 
sensors and actuators. Topics also include networking, communication protocols, circuit design, and physical 



 Visual Arts (ARTSVIS)148

prototyping. Instructor: Olson. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 555S, Visual and Media Studies 
564S, Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 564S
571S. Art as Work: Valuing Labor in the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Dance 561S; 
also C-L: Literature 525S, Visual and Media Studies 571S
575S. Generative Media Authorship - Music, Text & Image. ALP Covers Generative Media in all its 
forms. Lectures, workshops, discussions, one semester-length project, shorter individual exercises and readings. 
Interdisciplinary Graduate Seminar with advanced undergraduates and MFA students with permission of 
instructor. Instructor: Seaman and Supko. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 575S, Information Science 
+ Studies 575S, Music 575S, Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 575S
590S. Special Topics in the Visual Arts. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines or 
visual art areas. Instructor: Staff. One course.
599. Bookmaking: The Hand Printed Book. ALP, R Using printmaking and photography as a vehicle for 
the development of imagery, students will focus on the creation of a hand printed artist book throughout the 
semester. Information driving the imagery and/or text will be researched and displayed in bound, editioned 
copies of their book at the end of the semester. Prior bookmaking and printmaking coursework/experience is 
required, in addition to knowledge of Adobe Photoshop and Illustrator. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
605. Intermediate Drawing. This course allows students to explore their artistic interests and biases 
through a series of self-directed projects. Both the directness and the flexibility of the medium of drawing are 
investigated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
630. Projections in Time: The Still and Moving Image. ALP, R Project-based studio course exploring 
time through film, video, and still photography. Management, presentation and trace of time discussed in 
relation to various forms of art, augmented by examination of concepts of duration, aura, silence and thought 
as they pertain to still and moving images. Individual and group projects investigate various manifestations of 
stillness and movement in film, video, and photography, with and without sound. Slices of time in both media 
examined for their properties of continuity, discontinuity and fissure, with emphasis on rendering meaning 
in and through time and space. Prerequisite: Two 200-level or above photography or film production classes. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 630, Visual and Media 
Studies 629
640S. Expanded Cinema: Cinema Outside the Movie Theater. ALP This project-based course will 
explore moving image installation practices beyond the movie theater including alternative public spaces, 
devices, museums, white cubes and back boxes. The course will simultaneously examine relevant artworks in 
the context of their diverse histories and attendant theories, from early cinema devices, through works termed 
as Expanded Cinema around the 1970s, to current new media manifestations. Students will focus on developing 
moving image installation projects of their own, to be realized at various campus locations. Open to seniors and 
graduate students. Prerequisite: Two 200-level or above photography or film production classes. Instructor: 
Kaul. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 640S, Documentary Studies 640S, Literature 545S
641SL. Narrative Practice in Global Art Cinema. ALP, CCI Advanced in-depth examination of 
alternative narrative and doc-fiction practices emerging from national cinemas around the world. Intended for 
advanced undergraduate and graduate students with prior production experience. Screenings and readings 
related to significant national cinema movements and practitioners will inform production exercises, writing 
assignments and a final moving image project. Instructor: Gibson. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
641SL
655S. The Photographic Portfolio. ALP Students identify photographic territory to explore and build 
a body of work. Images are extensively work-shopped for sequencing. Particular emphasis on the making of 
high quality prints. Semester culminates in the production of finished portfolios in three formats: print, digital, 
and exhibition or installation. Student’s body of work to be informed by relevant precedents from history of 
photography, with an emphasis on identifying bodies of photographic work that communicate something 
larger than a single idea. Instructor consent required; this is the same course as Visual Arts 455, with additional 
graduate level work required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S. Special Topics in the Visual Arts. Subject varies from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 149

693. Individual Research Independent Study. R Advanced research in Visual Arts practice. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
694. Individual Research Independent Study in the Visual Arts. R Advanced research in Visual Arts 
Practice. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Visual and Media Studies
Visual Studies concerns all aspects of the production, circulation, and reception of visual images in culture, 

science, and society. Media Studies considers similar questions from the perspective of mass media as a social 
and cultural force through history. Taken together, these approaches engage students in the analysis of the 
rhetoric and expanded semiotics of images and their relationships to other media forms, both analog and digital, 
providing access to how meaning is socially, politically, and culturally constructed and received. Visual and media 
studies enable students to interpret the representations that shape the visual and conceptual constructs of a 
particular society, to consider how systems of media codes differ from culture to culture, and to think through 
how the symbolic constructions of life organize how one sees, understands, and participates in natural and social 
environments. Most importantly, establishing a clear connection between the theory and the practice of visuality 
and other media of expression are the foundations of visual and media studies. In that light, students will both 
study and create visual and digital media as part of their coursework, and participate in individual or group 
capstone projects that include a media production dimension.

A major in visual and media studies with a concentration in cinematic arts is newly available, as well as a 
minor in cinematic arts.

Courses in Visual and Media Studies (VMS)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary. Open only to first-year students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Book Art: Form and Function. ALP Studio course examining all aspects of bookmaking, including 
theories of bookmaking, designing and planning, typography, computer design, illustration, and binding. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 101
103. Traditions in Documentary Studies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 101; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 111
106S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach. ALP, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 105S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 106S, History 125S, Political Science 105S, Public 
Policy 170S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
115S. Introduction to Black and White Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
115S; also C-L: Visual Arts 115S
125L. Foundations of Game Design. One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 125L
130. Anthropology and Film. SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 130; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 104, Documentary Studies 
131. Experimental Drawing: Image and Bit Play. ALP Approaches the creation of digital image-
making in collective play. Includes individual and group brainstorming using different digital and traditional 
analogue processes (drawing, painting, and collage) to study how the ludic (play) enables creative thinking and 
experimentation in digital image manipulation. Database of images presented from multiple genres. Students 
work on outside assignment critiqued at end of class. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 130
135. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP This course explores ideas surrounding the 
creation of experimental sculpture. Employs non-traditional methods: “readymades,” non-traditional materials, 
conceptual processes, digital interaction and fabrication techniques (rapid prototyping), mixed media including 
video, and projection technologies. Content of work driven by individual student interests—sustainability, the 
anthropocene, feminism, social and political commentary, and/or more formal, abstract sculptural relations. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 135, Information Science + 
Studies 135, Dance 135
140. Create, Innovate, Act: Creativity, Innovation, and Social Action. ALP Introductory course 
for first and second year undergraduates. This course bridges sciences, arts, and humanities, with focus on 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)150

experiential knowledge and engagement with the everyday. Combines methods from broad range of areas 
based on creative inquiry and innovation. Students chose particular areas, or combination thereof, discussing 
their own research, inventions, artworks, compositions, performances, new media, or activist interventions. 
Specific skills developed at specialized maker spaces, labs, and studios. With exception of guest presentations, 
lectures delivered in video format to maximize class time production. Guest speakers include artists, activists, 
innovators, entrepreneurs, curators, and scholars. Instructor: Lasch. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 140, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship 140
141S. Audiovisual Cultures in East Asia: Film, Music, and Other Media. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 141S
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170; also C-L: Sociology 160, Linguistics 170, International Comparative Studies 169, Markets and 
Management Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
170D. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170D; also C-L: Sociology 160D, Linguistics 170D
171SA. Capturing the City: Documentary Photography in Berlin. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 171SA; also C-L: German 222SA, Visual Arts 171SA
190A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Visual Studies. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of 
disciplines that relate to visual and media studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
198. Experimental Interface Design. ALP, STS Class explores issues surrounding embodied approaches 
to interface design. Articulates methodology for generating new forms of human/computer interface; includes 
workshops, discussions, student presentations, critiques and group brainstorming sessions. Content related to 
biomimetics; haptic body knowledge; multi-modal sensing; physical computing; physical | digital relationships; 
networked relations; the potentials of virtual space and different qualities of space, both visual and sonic. 
Database potentials discussed and explored in service of developing new approaches to interface. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Seaman/Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 198, Information Science + Studies 198
199. LGBTQ/Queer Cinema and Cultural Production. ALP, SS This class investigates LGBTQ identities, 
communities and relationships pre, post, and during the Stonewall era through cinema, television, and new 
media. We will also explore constructions of sexuality, gender, class, race, and nationalism within the context of 
LGBTQ transnational film cultures and scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Literature 199, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 198
202. Imagining Europe: Arts, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see French 429; also 
C-L: Literature 274, Art History 202
202D. Introduction to Visual Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ Survey of visual culture, from issues of production, 
circulation and reception to how visual media have historically exerted power, elicited desire, and constructed 
social experience. Topics include: how photography, television, film, video, Internet, advertising, comics, and 
other imagery code vision and inscribe race, gender, sexuality and class differences, and dominate nature and 
animals; how the gaze links cultural performativity, from the coliseum to shopping malls and museums to sports 
events; and how the rhetoric and semiotics of representation provide access to ways in which visual meaning is 
socially, politically, and culturally produced and obtained. (Team-taught.) Instructor: Olson, Stiles. One course.
204S. Medicine and the Vision of Documentary Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary 
Studies 206S; also C-L: Public Policy 377S, Visual Arts 204S
205S. Introduction to Performance Studies. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 202S; 
also C-L: Literature 202S, Cultural Anthropology 219S, English 202S
206. Digital Imaging. ALP Photoshop and Illustrator used to introduce single and serial images for print and 
web output. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 206, 
Information Science + Studies, Documentary Studies
207S. Children’s Self Expression: Literacy Through Photography. ALP, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 151

Documentary Studies 224S; also C-L: Education 244S
208S. The Silent Film: An Introduction. ALP, STS The first thirty-five years of cinema as an emerging art 
form and mode of communication. Aesthetic, technical, and cultural aspects of the medium will be considered 
in historical context, from nineteenth-century experiments to nascent narrative conventions and the first 
disruptive avant-garde movements. Focus is on close reading of relevant films. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Visual Arts 208S, Documentary Studies 208S
209S. Representations of Women in the Classical World. ALP, CCI, CZ, W The lives of women in 
the Classical world viewed through the visual culture of Classical art. Through images of women in statues, 
reliefs, coins, and painting, the course explores the role of visual representation in communicating complex 
social and political messages. Issues such as the construction of gender, the expression of power and status, 
the preservation of social hierarchies, the protection of normative values, and the manipulation and control of 
sexuality are considered. Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Art History 215S, Classical Studies 243S
210S. Global Digital Media: Critical and Comparative Approaches to Information Technologies. 
ALP, CCI, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 212S
211S. Children and the Experience of Illness. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 202S; 
also C-L: Public Policy 395S, Child Policy Research
212FS. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, EI One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 209FS; also C-L: Visual Arts 212FS, Education 209FS
212S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, EI One course. 
C-L: see Documentary Studies 209S; also C-L: Visual Arts 212S, Education 209S, Information Science + Studies
213S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
350S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 225S, Cultural Anthropology 262S, Public Policy 387S, 
International Comparative Studies 368S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 350S, Human 
Rights
214. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 240; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 242, Literature 249, International Comparative 
Studies 265, Political Science 248
214S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 240S; also C-L: Literature 249S, Political Science 248S, International Comparative 
Studies 265S, Cultural Anthropology 440S, Information Science + Studies 242S, Information Science + Studies
215S. Documentary Photography and the Southern Culture Landscape. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 215S; also C-L: Visual Arts 216S
216. Anime: Origins, Forms, Mutations. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
161
217S. Sound, Music, and the Moving Image. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Music 129S; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies
218S. Sociology through Photography. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 227S; also 
C-L: Sociology 352S
220S. Ready for Prime Time: Writing the Dramatic TV Episode. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater 
Studies 285S; also C-L: English 224S
221. Printmaking: Silkscreen. ALP, R The silkscreen medium and its stencil-making processes including 
paper stencils, blockouts, crayon, and photographic methods. Students develop a significant body of prints using 
these techniques. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 224
221SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene). ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
217SA; also C-L: Dance 279SA, Music 217SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 217SA, Markets and 
Management Studies
222. Animated Film: A History and Aesthetic. ALP, STS Evolution of animation from the philosophical 
“toys” of the late eighteenth century to the major international entertainment form of today. Special focus on 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)152

American animation as it evolved from inspired individuals like Emile Cohl and Winsor McCay to a full-blown 
industrial model allowing for the creation of the animated feature and contemporary special effects. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 328, Information Science + Studies 211
223. Melodrama East and West. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 211; also 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 279
224S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
230S; also C-L: Visual Arts 232S, Public Policy 389S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
225SL. Revolution on Screen: Filming Conflict in the Middle East. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 281SL; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 338SL
226S. Space-Body-Image. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 229S; 
also C-L: Literature 229S
227S. Color Photography: Fieldwork and Digital Color. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
236S; also C-L: Visual Arts 240S
229S. Experimental Filmmaking. ALP The history of avant-garde in film and video combined with 
production exercises. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 229S
230. Black Popular Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 331
231. Indian Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 151; also C-L: 
Literature 211
232. Japanese Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 161; also C-L: 
Literature 213
233. Religion in American Life. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 237; also C-L: Ethics Elective
234. World of Korean Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
171; also C-L: Literature 212, Cultural Anthropology 255
235. Master Filmmakers of Chinese Cinemas. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 129; also C-L: Literature 214
236. Contemporary Japanese Visual Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, W Introduction to the art and visual 
culture of contemporary Japan concentrating on the postwar period, particularly 1980s to present. Performance 
art, installations, graphic and industrial design, photography, fashion, animation, and comics (manga). The 
transnational spread of popular culture within the Asia-Pacific region and the cross-cultural exchanges between 
East and West; the relationship between high art and popular culture; the impact of economic globalization and 
consumerism on visual culture. Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 262
237. Global Chinese Cities through Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 233; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 302
238S. Discourse of Disease and Infection. ALP, CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 409S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 404S
239. Graphic Asia: Visual Storytelling and Global Asian/American Networks. ALP, CCI One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 436; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 264
240. Drama of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 304; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 227
241. Computer Graphics. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 344
242. History of Art Markets. R, SS, STS Analytical survey of emergence of art markets, interactions 
between market behavior(s), visual/media culture(s). Addresses questions regarding the nature of art markets, 
the specificity of art markets and the application of economic and historical methodologies, how and where 
players in local markets throughout the world shape visual culture(s), effective causes for art consumption, taste, 
fashion throughout ages, and methodological implications of art market research at interface of Economics, Art 
History, Law and Visual Studies. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 231, Economics 344
242D. History of Art Markets. R, SS, STS Analytical survey and discussion of emergence of art markets, 



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 153

interactions between market behavior(s), visual/media culture(s). Addresses questions regarding the nature 
of art markets, the specificity of art markets and the application of economic and historical methodologies, 
how and where players in local markets throughout the world shape visual culture(s), effective causes for art 
consumption, taste, fashion throughout ages, and methodological implications of art market research at the 
interface of Economics, Art History, Law and Visual Studies. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art 
History 231D, Economics 344D
243. Book Art: Typography as Image. ALP Investigates use of text as vehicle for communication and visual 
form within book format. Typography, interaction of writing and page design, history of typography, writing and 
printed page, use of written form as work of art, book design, binding and how text as visual element interacts 
with and becomes the image. Prerequisite: Visual Arts 201 preferred. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 237
244D. From Caricature to Comic Strip. ALP, CCI History of caricature as a medium for political critique 
and social comment from the eighteenth century to the present, focusing on England, France, Germany, and 
the United States. Languages of graphic satire in the context of specific historical moments, from the War of 
Independence to the war in Iraq; history of popular journalism and the comic press; censorship and agitation 
for press freedom; cartooning and the assault on power; violence against cartoonists and issues of freedom of 
speech; growth of specialized juvenile graphic magazines and the development of the strip cartoon. Instructor: 
McWilliam. One course. C-L: Art History 244D
246A. The Creative Brain: Literature, Arts & Cognition. ALP, NS, STS One course. C-L: see French 
342A; also C-L: Neuroscience 242A
247. Global Culture. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 210; also C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
248. Contemporary Israeli Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
143; also C-L: Literature 217, Jewish Studies 241, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 214, Islamic Studies
249. Building Global Audiences. STS One course. C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 250; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 250
250. Japanese Architecture. ALP, CCI, CZ A survey of major architectural traditions of Japan. Sites 
ranging from prehistoric tombs and dwellings to contemporary design work of architects such as Isozaki Arata 
and Ando Tadao. Focus on the development of various architectural typologies: Buddhist temples, Shinto 
shrines, tea ceremony structures, garden design, imperial and shogunal palaces, fortified castles, modern 
institutional structures, and private residences. Japanese architectural practices compared with other Asian 
and Euro-American building traditions. Aesthetic, structural, historical, social, and religious issues considered. 
Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Art History 234
251S. Indigenous Journeys in South Asian Film and Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies 252S; also C-L: Literature 250S
252S. Photography in Context. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 245S; also C-L: Visual 
Arts 254S, International Comparative Studies 245S
253. Russian Revolutionary Cinema. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 281; also C-L: Russian 381, 
Marxism and Society
254. Representing Slavery. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 314
256. Drawing Foundations in Early Modern Europe. ALP Through classroom lectures, museum visits, 
and studio practice, this course studies the place of drawing since its early modern theorization in the visual arts 
and in the artistic practice. Drawings can be records of visual observation, or of a speculative thought process; 
ways of working out ideas, and of presenting plans; they also achieve the status of independent art objects. 
Students will gain familiarity with drawing as an artistic medium related to major questions about art and 
society, while also learning fundamental and practical drawing skills that will give deeper insights into theory. 
Instructor: Caviglia, Fick. One course. C-L: Art History 265, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 240
257L. Web Project Design and Development. QS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 
241L



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)154

258. Spies Like Us: Screening Cold War Espionage. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 270; also C-L: Literature 225, International Comparative Studies 262
259A. The Arts in New York: A Thematic Approach. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see English 312A; also 
C-L: Theater Studies 213A, Public Policy 312A
260S. Cinematography. ALP In-depth investigation of cinematographic techniques and principles 
for motion picture production. Exercises in both film and high definition digital video. Emphasis on 
advanced lighting techniques, lensing, camera mobility, set operations and close analysis of master works of 
cinematography. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 281S, Visual Arts 248S
261S. Moving Image Practice. ALP, STS Film and digital video production in conjunction with the history 
and theory of these technologies. Students may produce work in 8mm, 16mm film and digital video and learn 
the basics of non-linear digital editing on Final Cut Pro. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 
370S, Information Science + Studies
262A. History of Netherlandish Art in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ See Art History 506A. 
(Taught in the Netherlands.) Not open to students who have taken 506A-507A. Course credit contingent upon 
successful completion of Art History 263A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 262A, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 242A, International Comparative Studies
263A. History of Netherlandish Art in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ See Art History 507A. 
(Taught in the Netherlands.) Not open to students who have taken 506A-507A. Second half of Art History 
262A-263A; required for credit for 262A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 263A, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 243A, International Comparative Studies
264. Contemporary Documentary Film: Filmmakers and the Full Frame Documentary Film 
Festival. ALP, CCI, STS Integrated with the films and filmmakers of the Full Frame Documentary Film 
Festival. The art form, style, and technology of contemporary documentary films. Issues of autonomy and power, 
politics, and public policies. Analysis of outstanding films from around the world. Presentations and discussions 
by filmmakers. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 270, Political Science 276, Public Policy 
374, Arts & Sciences IDEAS themes and University Course 206
265. History of Documentary Film. ALP, CCI Introduction to the history, theory, and styles of 
nonfiction film and video. Transformation in technologies and their influence on form, from actuality films to 
contemporary digital documentaries. Documentary’s marginal status and surprising commercial appeal; the 
mixing of fiction and nonfiction strategies in cultural construction. Use of documentary as a tool for exploring 
individual identity, filmmaker/subject relationships, and fomenting political change. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Documentary Studies 107
265A. History of Documentary Film. ALP, CCI Introduction to the history, theory, and styles of 
nonfiction film and video. Transformation in technologies and their influence on form, from actuality films to 
contemporary digital documentaries. Documentary’s marginal status and surprising commercial appeal; the 
mixing of fiction and nonfiction strategies in cultural construction. Use of documentary as a tool for exploring 
individual identity, filmmaker/subject relationships, and fomenting political change. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Documentary Studies 107A
266. Media History: Old and New. ALP, SS, STS, W Development of various media forms in historical 
and social contexts. Impact of old “new” media on established art, commerce, education, politics, entertainment 
from 19th c. on. Changing ideas about authenticity, authority, agency, reception, identity, and power relating 
to emerging media forms, production, circulation. Overlaps, disjunctures, convergences, persistences and 
antiquations via case studies and examples. Technologies include print publishing, photography, audio 
recording, film, telegraph, maps, exhibitions, architecture and installations alongside contemporary web, 
multimedia, database, game, virtual reality, and telepresence systems. Final rich media research project 
required. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 268
267. Film Genres. ALP A historical survey of motion picture genre as a stylistic and narrative device, 
including comedy, horror, the musical, the western, and science fiction. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Literature 220
268S. American Film Comedy. ALP A historical survey of American film comedy from silent cinema to 



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 155

contemporary television and film. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
270S. Constructing Immersive Virtual Worlds. STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 
270S
271S. Film Animation Production. ALP Experimentation with various media; mastering animation 
techniques such as metamorphosis, timing, articulation, storytelling, sound design, special effects, and camera. 
Each student to produce a one-minute animated film on the Oxberry 16mm film animation stand. Not open to 
students who have taken this course as Film/Video/Digital 102S. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 
326S, Information Science + Studies
273. The Middle East Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Film as access into the region through a series of 
direct as well as poetic connections woven across films viewed, filmmakers featured, lectures, discussions, and 
texts read. By means of the integration of course components and students’ weekly responses, an understanding 
of the region is developed by way of inquiry into and rigorous engagement with cultural production. From 
feature length films to shorts, the breadth of the work we will engage with includes documentaries, dramas, and 
less traditional forms. A substantial midterm paper, and a final project to be in the form of one of three potential 
possibilities subject to approval of proposal: a paper, a talk, a short film. Instructor: Kipervaser. One course. 
C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 218, Political Science 273, Documentary Studies 274
274D. Race, Genomics, and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 261D; also C-L: Science & Society 258D, Global Health 258D, Cultural Anthropology 261D, Biology 261D
275S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 341S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 266S, Literature 263S, Documentary Studies
278A. Decentering Spanish Otherness: Visual Culture and Coloniality in Contemporary Spain. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 343A
279AS. Studies in the United States Culture Industries. ALP, R, W A survey of the major professions 
in the arts, media, and entertainment industries, featuring prominent speakers from fields such as studio and 
independent film and television, screenwriting, directing, producing, financing, acting, artist representation, 
journalism, marketing, animation, and music. Students apply theory and analysis to projects currently in 
production, observing live tapings, rehearsals, and screenings. Real-world case studies to examine how and 
why stories chosen for production shape and are shaped by societal values and discourse, domestic and global 
economies, and the greater world of the arts and media. Only offered on Duke in LA program. Instructor: Price. 
One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 282AS, Public Policy 293AS
280. German Film. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see German 264
281S. Graphic Design in Motion. Motion Design is the creation of animated graphics using graphic 
design, typography, advertising, photography, animation, sound and filmmaking. Emphasis will be on design, 
conceptualization and ability to communicate ideas and work collaboratively. Learn language and principles 
of graphic design by developing a method for solving design problems, communicating ideas effectively, and 
creating professional motion design such as title credits, logo animation, and newsreel that can be integrated 
into film, life performance or web. Photoshop, Illustrator, After Effects, video editing and 3D software will be 
used. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 281S
282. Film Noir. ALP, CCI, EI The cinema of the “dark side” of human nature and human relationships: 
crime, intrigue, treachery, betrayal, multiple forms of psycho- and psycho-sexual pathology. Possible films: M, 
Stranger on the Third Floor, Double Indemnity, Elevator to the Gallows, Asphalt Jungle, Sunset Boulevard, 
Touch of Evil, The Maltese Falcon, Night of the Hunter, The Third Man, Rififi, L.A. Confidential, Blue Velvet, 
Soylent Green, Crash. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: German 270, Literature 223
282S. Film Noir. ALP, CCI, EI The cinema of the “dark side” of human nature and human relationships: 
crime, intrigue, treachery, betrayal, multiple forms of psycho- and psycho-sexual pathology. Possible films: M, 
Stranger on the Third Floor, Double Indemnity, Elevator to the Gallows, Asphalt Jungle, Sunset Boulevard, 
Touch of Evil, The Maltese Falcon, Night of the Hunter, The Third Man, Rififi, L.A. Confidential, Blue Velvet, 
Soylent Green, Crash. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: German 270S, Literature 223S
283. Existentialist Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see German 386; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 372, Literature 218



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)156

284S. Trauma and Nostalgia: East European Film in the 21st Century. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 288S; also C-L: Literature 216S, International Comparative Studies 
288S
285. Ritual, Performance, and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 284; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 284, Dance 284, International Comparative Studies 266
287. German History Through Film. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 286; also C-L: History 
255, Literature 286
288A. Fundamentals of Web-Based Multimedia Communications. ALP, R One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 240A
288L. Fundamentals of Web-Based Multimedia Communications. ALP, R One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 240L
288S. Fundamentals of Web-Based Multimedia Communications. R One course. C-L: see Information 
Science + Studies 240S
289. Introduction to Film Studies. ALP Basic film theory and history of motion picture technology. 
Introduction to experimental, documentary, and narrative forms of Third World, European, and United 
States cinemas. Basic film theory and history of motion picture technology. Introduction to experimental, 
documentary, and narrative forms of Third World, European, and United States cinemas. Economics and 
aesthetics. Instructor: Hadjioannou. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 278, English 181, Literature 110, 
Documentary Studies 264, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
290. Special Topics in Visual Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines that 
relate to visual studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Visual Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines that 
relate to visual studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290SA. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of 
disciplines that relate to visual studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open to qualified students, by consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified students, by consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Chinese Art 1900 to Present. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Study of selected works of Chinese art and visual 
culture (painting, sculpture, architecture, video, performance, and installation art; fashion design and cinema) 
from 1900 to the present. Emphasis on the visual analysis of objects as well as their social and historical 
context. Instructor: Abe. One course. C-L: Art History 295, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 150, International 
Comparative Studies
295S. Arts Entrepreneurship. One course. C-L: see Music 295S; also C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
295S, Dance 201S, Theater Studies 312S, Documentary Studies 295S, Visual Arts 295S
296A. Internship in New York. One course. C-L: see English 313A; also C-L: Theater Studies 214A, Art 
History 312A
296A-1. Internship in New York. C-L: see English 313A-1; also C-L: Theater Studies 214A-1, Art History 
312A-1
297S. Revealing Histories: Polish Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Polish 298S; also C-L: 
Literature 298S
298S. Film Theory. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 316S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist 
Studies
299. Aesthetics: The Philosophy of Art. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 202



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 157

301A. The Business of Art and Media. One course. C-L: see English 310A; also C-L: Art History 313A
302. Philosophy of Mind. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Philosophy 212; also C-L: Linguistics 208, 
Information Science + Studies
303. History of Photography, 1839 to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ Major artists and movements in 
the history of the photographic medium, including visual and critical traditions inherited and manipulated by 
photographers, the ways photography participated in nineteenth- and twentieth-century art movements as well 
as documentation and social change, and critical photographic discourse throughout this period. Topics include 
the invention of photography, ‘Art’ photography and documentary photography in the nineteenth century, 
pictorialism, ‘straight’ and purist photography, photography and modernist art movements (dada, surrealism, 
Bauhaus, Russian avant-garde), twentieth-century documentary, and photography of the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, 
1980s, and 1990s. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 303, Documentary Studies 303, International 
Comparative Studies 352
304. Mapping History with Geographic Information Systems. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 315; also C-L: Art History 315
305S. Video Journalism. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 365S; also 
C-L: Public Policy 365S, Documentary Studies 367S, Information Science + Studies, Policy Journalism and 
Media Studies
308. Italian Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 380; also C-L: Literature 215, Theater Studies 
276
309S. Environmental Issues & the Documentary Arts. ALP One course. C-L: see Environment 315S; 
also C-L: Documentary Studies 315S
310. World War II and French Film. CCI, CZ, EI, FL One course. C-L: see French 413; also C-L: History 
295
311S. Comics and Culture: Images of Modern France in the Making. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: 
see French 414S
312. Yesterday’s Classics/Today’s Movies. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 415
313S. Documentary Video Production Workshop. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 312S; 
also C-L: Visual Arts 312S
314S. Activating the Archive: Archival Research as Documentary Practice. ALP, EI, R One course. 
C-L: see Documentary Studies 316S; also C-L: Visual Arts 316S
315SA. stARTup Project. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 316SA; also C-L: Dance 307SA, Music 
316SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 316SA, Markets and Management Studies
316S. Understanding Mediation. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Literature 325S; also C-L: English 
480S, Theater Studies 249S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 325S, Documentary Studies 358S
317S. Russian Language and Culture through Film. CCI, FL, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Russian 
373S
318. Eastern Europe in Transition: Markets, Media, and the Mafia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Russian 350; also C-L: Sociology 221, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
319S. Russian Language and Culture through Film II. ALP, CCI, FL, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Russian 374S
320A. Contemporary Russian Media. CCI, EI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 223A; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 
322S. Motion Graphics for Film and Video. ALP, STS An exploration of techniques and theoretical 
approaches to motion graphics, animation and post-production effects in film and video. Readings and 
screenings will lead to student-produced exercises through exposure to applications in the Adobe Creative Cloud 
and digital editing software. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 322S, Documentary Studies 323S
323S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)158

320S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 247S, International Comparative Studies 320S, Latin 
American Studies 320S, Information Science + Studies 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 323S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 318S, Human Rights
324. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302; also 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 402, Information Science + 
Studies 302
325L. Optics and Photonics. NS One course. C-L: see Physics 320L; also C-L: Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 340L
326. Introduction to Programming and User Interface Design in Unity 3D. STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 320
326S. Introduction to Programming and User Interface Design in Unity 3D. STS One course. C-L: 
see Information Science + Studies 320S
327S. Theories of Visual and Media Studies. ALP Survey of visual and media studies theories. 
Development of analytical methods to critically engage with analog and digital visual media production, 
circulation and consumption in a global context. Overview of the historical development of visual studies and 
media studies as distinct critical fields with intellectual ties to cultural studies, art history, philosophy, sociology, 
literature, communications, and information science. Exploration of contemporary convergences between visual 
and media studies, in dialog with scientific visualization, cognitive neuroscience, and quantitative approaches 
to image processing. Course required for VMS majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson, Stiles, 
Weisenfeld. One course.
328S. Media Theory. STS One course. C-L: see Literature 317S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 214S
329S. Non-Profit Cultural Institutions. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 310S; also C-L: 
Economics 247S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 310S, Public Policy 318S, Dance 208S
330. Gender and Popular Culture. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 362
331S. Gender and Popular Culture. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 362S
332L. Virtual Museums: Theories and Methods of Twenty-First-Century Museums. ALP, R, 
STS The future of museums will be one of immateriality and interaction. Course focuses on how the “Internet of 
Things,” augmented reality technologies, new data analyses of artifacts will transform missions, roles, and goals 
of museums and collections. Core of course will be digital lab sessions focused on virtual reconstruction of lost 
heritage—e.g., museums and sites destroyed and damaged by ISIS and other conflicts in Iraq and the Middle 
East (Hatra, Nineveh, Nimrud, Baghdad). Instructor: Forte. One course. C-L: Art History 305L, Visual Arts 
305L, Information Science + Studies 305L, Classical Studies 240L
332S. American Independent Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 318S; also C-L: English 
389S, Theater Studies 373S, Documentary Studies 322S
333S. Photo Workshop. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 318S; also C-L: Visual Arts 318S
334. Roman Spectacle. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Gladiatorial games, wild beast hunts, elaborately-staged 
executions of condemned criminals, and chariot racing as some of the most popular forms of public 
entertainment in the Roman world. The ritual of these entertainments and spectacles, the circumstances of 
and occasions for their performance, and the form and elaboration of the venues—the amphitheater, the circus, 
the theater, and the stadium—in which they took place. Visual and literary representations of these spectacles. 
Instructor: Dillon. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 354, Art History 334
335S. Acting For the Camera. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 275S
336. Pilgrimage and Tourism. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, W Investigation of pilgrimage and tourist destinations 
(Jerusalem, Rome, Santiago, Orlando, New York) from the Middle Ages to the present through a study of their 
material remains, primary sources and theoretical texts. Discussion of the moral and ethical issues involved in 
marketing authenticity from a cross-cultural and comparative perspective. Evaluation based on weekly student 
written assessments of the texts and the presentation of a pilgrimage site of their choice. Instructor: Wharton. 



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 159

One course. C-L: Art History 336, Religion 260
337. The History of Hip-Hop. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 335; also 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 335, Music 335, English 381
338S. Writing the Short Film. ALP, W In-depth study of the short format movie. Development of short 
film concept and script, including pre-production, storyboarding, and look books. Instructor: Hawkins. One 
course. C-L: Visual Arts 303S
339S. Sound for Film and Video. ALP Theory and practice of sound recording techniques and strategies 
for film and video. Focus on sound/image relationship, sound design and sound acquisition. Screenings and 
readings will reinforce practice exercises. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 353S, Visual 
Arts 350S
340. Popular Representations of Black Masculinity. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 338; also C-L: English 380
340S. Producing Docu-Fiction. ALP Investigation of hybrid, genre-defying films that question traditional 
definitions of documentary and fiction. Emphasis on experimental forms, documentary reenactment, 
mockumentary and dramatized “true stories.” Exploration of both documentary and fiction production 
techniques, culminating in the production of a final video project. Instructor: Gibson. One course. C-L: 
Documentary Studies 278S, Visual Arts 340S
341S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 332S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 236S, Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 332S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 332S, Latino/a Studies in the Global 
South, Human Rights
342S. Islamic Media. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 329S; also C-L: 
Religion 379S, International Comparative Studies 331S
343. Representing the Artist in Film and Popular Culture. ALP Cultural constructions of the artist and 
the art world, using fictional and documentary film as starting point; the artist in literature; popular conceptions 
of artistic biography, mentality, and lifestyle—genius, gender, sexuality, madness, bohemianism; relationship 
between images of the artist in popular culture and methods within academic art history; the artist in cinema 
from Michelangelo to Warhol. No prerequisites. Instructor: McWilliam. One course. C-L: Art History 350
344. Performance Art History and Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Performance Art History and 
Theory explores cultural experimentation, theoretical strategies, and ideological aims of performance art 
internationally; examines interchanges between artists’ theories of performance, stylistic development, and 
impact in the context of cultural criticism and art history; traces interdisciplinary genealogies of performance 
globally; thinks about the body as a vehicle for aesthetic expression, communication, and information in its 
critique of social and political conditions; studies performance and gender, sexuality, race, and class; asks 
how performance alters the semiotics of visual culture and contributes to a paradigm shift from modernism to 
postmodernism. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 275, Literature 222, Theater 
Studies 235, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 276, Art History 344
345S. Dance for the Camera. ALP, R, STS One course. C-L: see Dance 306S; also C-L: Documentary 
Studies 242S
346S. Visual Cultures of Medicine. ALP, STS Exploration of the visual culture(s) of medicine. The 
changing role of diagnostic visuality and medical imaging from various philosophical and historical perspectives. 
The connections between medical ways of seeing and other modes of visuality, photography, cinema, television, 
computer graphics. The circulation of medical images and images of medicine in popular culture as well as in 
professional medical cultures. Instructor: Olson. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 279S
347. Idealistic Nature: The Literature, Philosophy, and Cognition of Ecology. ALP, CZ, EI One 
course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 307; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 347, English 
355
348S. Multimedia Documentary: Editing, Production, and Publication. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 360S; also C-L: Visual Arts 357S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 242S



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)160

349S. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302S; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 402S, Information 
Science + Studies 302S
350S. The Photobook: History and Practice. ALP, CCI, CZ Cultural, intellectual and artistic history 
and uses of the book in photographic practice. Traces technical, conceptual, formal innovations that mark 
international history of photography books through lectures/hands-on examination of key books, including 
lesser known innovations and uses of photobook in Eastern Europe, the Soviet Union and Japan. Marries 
historical awareness with studio practice. Simultaneous immersion in production of images as well as collecting 
of archives from various cultures. Crafting of photobooks in several genres as students edit, print, scan, assemble 
materials. Seminar includes readings, discussions, short writings, field trips. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 249S, Documentary Studies 250S
351. 3D Modeling and Animation. ALP Basic concepts of 3D modeling and animation; fundamentals of 
computer geometry; knowledge of basic tools of 3D software (Maya); introduction to modeling, animation, 
texturing, lighting, and rendering; combination of these techniques in a final project. Recommended 
prerequisite: Visual and Media Studies 206 or 396. Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 
209, Information Science + Studies 209
352S. Documentary Publishing from Gutenberg to the Web: The Vanishing Point Course. ALP, 
CCI, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 352S; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 352S, Visual Arts 352S
353. The Black Performance Tradition: Michael Jackson and Prince. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 336; also C-L: Music 336
354S. Poetic Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 311S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 311S
355. American Dreams, American Movies. ALP One course. C-L: see English 288; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 272
355S. Computer Game Design and Development. ALP One course. C-L: see Information Science + 
Studies 355S
356S. Editing for Film and Video. ALP Theory and practice of film and video editing techniques. 
Exploration of traditional film cutting as well as digital non-linear editing. Exercises in narrative, documentary 
and experimental approaches to structuring moving image materials. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Documentary Studies 288S
357S. Digital Storytelling and Interactive Narrative. ALP, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information 
Science + Studies 351S; also C-L: Literature 352S
357SA. Digital Storytelling. ALP, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 351SA; also 
C-L: Literature 352SA
358S. Digital Durham. ALP, R, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 356S; also C-L: 
Education 356S, History 382S
359A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey (Service-Learning). 
ALP, CCI, EI This course explores the complexities of global Los Angeles by focusing on issues that especially 
impact its marginalized communities. For the service-learning component, students volunteer at least 20 hours 
during the semester at nonprofit organizations engaged in the pursuit of social justice. This experience provides 
an opportunity to observe, participate in and reflect on the day-to-day implementation of social action, policy 
and organizing initiatives. As part of the volunteer commitment and in lieu of a final paper, students produce 
a documentary media project that communicates goals identified by and in collaboration with the community 
partner. Instructor: Dowdey. One course. C-L: Literature 230A, Documentary Studies 359A, Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 359A, Documentary Studies
360S. Writing the Movie. Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Writing for the Screen. 
ALP, W Theory and practice of the process of writing for the screen. Exploration of visual storytelling; analysis 
of screenplays and movies; developing original stories into screenplay format. Projects: writing and presenting 
treatments, outlines and scenes. Instructor: Hawkins. One course. C-L: English 225S



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 161

361S. Photographic Memory: Photo Albums, Photobooks, & Zines. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 361S; also C-L: Visual Arts 361S
362S. 16mm Film Production. ALP Hands-on experience with 16mm motion picture film and photography. 
In-depth exploration of the techniques and aesthetics of film production, including basic screen writing, lighting, 
storytelling, and editing. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 357S, Visual Arts 356S
363S. Time, Space and Film. ALP, R, STS Exploration of temporal transformation, spatial articulation 
and subjectivity in the moving image. From special effects and avant-garde experiments to the long take and the 
fluid master. Readings and screenings inform hands-on practical exercises. Instructor: Gibson. One course.
364S. Web Design and Narrative: Artists, Documentarians, Art Historians, and Entrepreneurs. 
ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 354S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 354S, Visual 
Arts 364S
365S. The Documentary Turn: Southern Culture. ALP, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Documentary 
Studies 365S
365SL. Digital Art History I: New Representational Technologies. Research and study in material 
culture and visual arts expressed by using new visual technologies to record and communicate complex sets 
of visual and physical data from urban and/or archaeological sites. Introduces techniques for presentation 
and interpretation of visual material through a series of interpretive and reconstructive technologies, 
including development of web pages, timelines, Photoshop, Illustrator, Trimble SketchUp, Google Maps, GIS. 
Uses test cases (archaeological site or urban/architectural site) to develop techniques of interpretation and 
representation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 354SL
366L. Theories and Practices of Data Visualization. R, STS Combination of lectures, labs, and 
workshops on the theories and practices of data visualization, focused on creative applications of advanced 
tools and software, including introduction to data scraping, data cleaning, and elementary coding. Students 
will use innovative strategies to develop new databases with imperfect information, combining qualitative 
and quantitative data on the interface of the humanities and the social sciences. Individual and collaborative 
research projects will combine qualitative and quantitative analysis with weekly feedback and assessment. 
Instructor: Leunissen. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 366L
367S. Unraveling Paradise: Examining the Mythical Ideal Through Art and Documentary of the 
Caribbean. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 336S; also C-L: Visual Arts 336S, Latin 
American Studies 336S
368S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 366S; also C-L: Public Policy 388S, History 398S, Visual Arts 366S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 366S, Human Rights
370S. Women and Film: Directors of the Diaspora. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 339S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 339S
371. Kafka and Cinema. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see German 372; also C-L: Literature 377, Jewish 
Studies 372
372S. Articles of Truth: Creating Culture through Multimedia. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 337S; also C-L: Visual Arts 337S
373S. The View Camera: Black and White Large Format Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 368S; also C-L: Visual Arts 368S
374. Artists in Healthcare: Collaborations and Complexities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Dance 371; also C-L: Music 371, Theater Studies 371
375S. Recycled Cinema. ALP Found footage filmmaking, cinematic appropriation, the use of archival 
materials in documentaries, and current day internet mashups. Covering early cinema, experimental and 
documentary cinema, television, and the internet. Key emphasis on practice based assignments with a 
concurrent focus on the historical impact of the field from seminal moments to the contemporary moment 
through films and readings on the subject. Prerequisite: 100-level or above Visual Arts course, or permission of 
instructor. Instructor: Kaul. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 375S, Documentary Studies 375S, Literature 373S



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)162

376SA. Berlin Film City: Movies in the Metropolis. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see German 376SA; also 
C-L: History 268SA
377S. Public Policy Video. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 271S; also C-L: Public 
Policy 375S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 271S, Human Rights
378. Chinese Buddhist Art. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Chinese sculpture, painting, and architecture in relation to 
Buddhist texts, practice, and ritual from the fourth through the ninth century C.E. Introduction to precedents 
in Indian and Central Asian Buddhist art. Emphasis on the relationship between Buddhist and non-Buddhist 
imagery. Instructor: Abe. One course. C-L: Art History 378
379S. Visiting Filmmaker Master Courses: Special Topics. ALP Intensive production courses 
with visiting filmmaker. Topics vary by semester. May be taken twice. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Documentary Studies 285S, Visual Arts 325S
380S. Visualizing Cities: Representing Urban Landscapes, Cultures, and Environments. ALP, 
CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 380S
380SA. Digital Cities and the Cartographic Imagination. CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Information 
Science + Studies 380SA
381S. Graphic Design in Motion. ALP Motion design is the creation of animated graphics using graphic 
design, typography, advertising, photography, animation, sound and filmmaking. Emphasis will be on design, 
conceptualization and ability to communicate ideas and work collaboratively. Learn language and principles 
of graphic design by developing a method for solving design problems, communicating ideas effectively, and 
creating professional motion design such as title credits, logo animation, and newsreel that can be integrated 
into film, life performance or web. Photoshop, Illustrator, After Effects, and video editing software will be used. 
Prerequisite: one of the following: Visual Arts 102, 206, 223, or 326S, or Arts of the Moving Image 350S or 357S. 
Instructor: Salvatella de Prada. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 381S
382D. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Major avant-garde movements of the post-World War II 
era, with a concentration on the unprecedented changes in the mediums of art, its forms, impact on society and 
politics, and ethical role in shaping culture through painting and sculpture, conceptual and performance art, 
installation and new media, video, photography, and film. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Art History 381D, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 277D, International Comparative Studies 219D, Ethics Elective
385. Mafia at the Movies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 385; also C-L: Literature 385, Theater 
Studies 375
386S. Documentary and Policy: How Documentary Influences Policy. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 272S; also C-L: Public Policy 228S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 272S
387S. Screenwriting. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 273S; also C-L: English 317S
389S. Women and Visual Media Studies. ALP, CCI This course explores visual media by women artists, 
as well as the production, circulation, and reception of visual culture about the idea of “woman.” Drawing on 
feminist scholarship across disciplines, students will examine representation, spectatorship, power, beauty, and 
sex. We will explore work by popular icon Beyoncé, artist Lorna Simpson, but also independent documentary 
films on relevant themes. Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 338S, 
African & African American Studies 386S
390. Special Topics in Visual & Media Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Visual Studies. Topics differ 
by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Topics in Digital History and Humanities. One course. C-L: see History 390S-1; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 390S-1
390T. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies: Tutorial. Topics vary per semester. Information 
science and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. Theoretical 
readings coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 163

391. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. See Visual and Media Studies 391. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by 
consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified students in the junior year, by 
consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Visual and Media Studies 393. Open to qualified students in the 
junior year, by consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
396. Graphic Design in Multimedia: Theory and Practice. ALP Design history and theory. Lectures and 
projects focused on direct interaction with digitized elements of historically significant designs. Design elements 
and principles. Comparison of the language and tools of old and new media. Analysis of visual materials, 
discovering conceptual and stylistic connections, including Illustrator and Photoshop. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 223, Information Science + Studies 396
397L. Interactive Graphics: Critical Code. ALP, QS Introduction to interactive graphics programming 
for artists. Explores object-oriented programming via the Processing programming environment as well as 
historical and theoretical appreciation of interactivity and computer graphics as artistic media. Combines 
discussions of key concepts from the readings with hands-on Processing projects and critiques. No previous 
programming experience or prerequisites required. Enrollment limited to 15 students. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 294L, Visual Arts 242L, Policy Journalism and Media
410S. Black Frame: African American Documentary Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 410S; also C-L: Documentary Studies 440S
412S. Cultures of New Media. ALP, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 434S; also C-L: 
Literature 412S, International Comparative Studies 432S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 425S
414A. Urban Fiction and Collective Imagination: Madrid Through Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 414A
416S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 415S; also C-L: Literature 415S, Cultural Anthropology 415S, International 
Comparative Studies 415S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 415S
417S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
417S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 215S, International Comparative Studies 417S, Islamic Studies
419A. Spanish Cinema from the Transition to the Present. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 
419A
420S. Political Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 380S; also 
C-L: Literature 381S, Latin American Studies 380S
423S. City Stories, Eastern Europe: Prague, Warsaw, Budapest, Sarajevo. CCI, CZ, SS One course. 
C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 423S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 423S
425S. Surrealism: Aesthetics and Politics. ALP, FL, R One course. C-L: see French 425S
429S. Historical Documentary Production. ALP, EI, R, SS Course examines how archival footage and 
photographs are used in historical documentaries about struggles for social equity in America. Iconic films 
will be reviewed to assess editors’ strategies for employing archival material in documentaries on the labor 
movement, civil rights movement, anti-Vietnam war movement, and early lesbian and gay rights movement. 
Students will then conduct research for film footage and photographs and learn practical steps needed to acquire 
rights to use the material. During the second half of the semester, students will be guided in the production and 
editing of their own short historical documentary. Instructor: Orenstein. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 
329S
432S. From the Art of the Pleasure Quarters to Tokyo Pop. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Starting in the 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)164

bordellos of 17th-century Edo (now modern-day Tokyo) and spanning up through the kitsch of contemporary 
Japanese pop culture, this course examines the vibrant and often bawdy forms of Japanese print and visual 
culture. Introduction to Japanese printmaking practices and a forum for discussing critical issues related to 
sexuality, censorship, spectacle, satire, tourism, the supernatural, and the Asian experience of modernity. 
Investigates the spectacular worlds of the kabuki theater, sumo wrestling, and the “pleasure quarters” (the red-
light district designated for licensed prostitution). Instructor: Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Art History 432S
433S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. 
C-L: see Spanish 433S; also C-L: Art History 433S, International Comparative Studies 459S, Latin American 
Studies
434. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP This course explores ideas surrounding the 
creation of experimental sculpture. employs non-traditional methods: “readymades,” non-traditional materials, 
conceptual processes, digital interaction and fabrication techniques (rapid prototyping), mixed media including 
video, and projection technologies. Content of work driven by individual student interests, sustainability, the 
anthropocene, feminism, social and political commentary, and/or more formal, abstract sculptural relations. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 435, Information Science + 
Studies 436, Dance 435
435S. Soviet Life through the Camera’s Lens. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 433S
438S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 438S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 438S, International 
Comparative Studies 407S, Study of Sexualities 438S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 438S, Literature 
438S, International Comparative Studies
439. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 439; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 439, Literature 439, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 439
450S. Narrative Projects. ALP Development and production of short narrative film projects. Project-based 
course taking short film concepts through script development, pre-production, production and post-production. 
Prior video production experience recommended. Instructor: Haverkamp. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 450S
451S. Filming Art. ALP Practice-based production course examining the filmic realization and visualization 
of the artistic process. Screenings of bio-pics, documentaries and experimental films focusing on artists and 
various art forms complement readings and hands on production exercises that will prepare students to 
undertake their own short video portrait of an artist or work of art. Instructor: Gibson. One course. C-L: Visual 
Arts 451S, Documentary Studies 451S
454SL. Digital Art History II: New Representational Technologies Advanced. Team-based research 
and study in material culture and visual arts expressed by using new visual technologies to record, interrogate, 
and communicate complex sets of visual and physical data from urban and/or archaeological sites. More 
advanced techniques for presentation and interpretation of visual material through a series of interpretive and 
reconstructive technologies. Use test cases (archaeological site or urban/architectural site) to further develop 
techniques of interpretation and representation. Public facing presentation of data and results of research is aim 
of final team-based project. Prerequisite: Art History 354SL/Visual and Media Studies 365SL. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Art History 454SL
455S. World of Gaming: Art, Theory, Technology, and Business of a Multi-Billion Dollar Global 
Industry. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 455S; also C-L: Art 
History 453S, Literature 455S
476S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics and Poetics of Knowledge Production. CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 476S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 411S, 
Literature 476S, History 448S, Documentary Studies 476S
489S. Screening Europe. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see French 489S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 479S, Literature 489S
490S. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies. An advanced investigation of major concepts and 
principles in visual and media studies and/or theories of visual and media studies. Contents and methods vary 



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 165

with instructors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. Consent 
of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
492. Independent Study. See Visual and Media Studies 491. Open only to qualified students in the senior 
year. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified students in the senior year. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Visual and Media Studies 493. Open only to qualified students 
in the senior year. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
495S. Honors Thesis Workshop. ALP, R, W Research and writing skills for students completing an 
honors thesis; bibliography, library and on-line research; use of archives; picture research and other research 
skills relating to the history of art; organization of material and preparation for writing; drafting, editing, and 
production of a finished text; use of scholarly conventions of referencing, footnoting etc. Compulsory for seniors 
preparing a graduation with distinction dissertation in art history. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Art History 495S, Visual Arts 495S
496S. Visual Arts Practice and Cinematic Arts Concentration Senior Capstone. ALP Senior 
capstone seminar in advanced research in Visual Arts practice and theory, Cinematic Arts practice and theory. 
Capstone requires the completion of major research project or body of work, participation in regular critiques, 
and presentation of work at a capstone exhibition. Visual Arts students work in any given media or combination 
thereof. Cinematic Arts Concentration students focus on the research and/or production of works in film, 
video, animation, or any time-based media. Course is structured around joint critiques and guest presentations, 
fostering an interdisciplinary environment representative of contemporary art contexts and professional 
practice. Instructor: Gibson, Kaul, Lasch, Salvatella, Wendell. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 496S
497S. Advanced Visual Practice. ALP Majors in the fall of their senior year work on independent projects 
in a group situation. Students meet weekly with professor teaching course to discuss progress and monthly 
with full Visual Arts and Visual and Media Studies faculty for critiques. This course serves as anchor course 
for students participating in Graduation with Distinction in Visual Arts and those Graduation with Distinction 
students in Visual and Media Studies with a practice-based component to their project. Initial development of 
projects during the fall semester, brought to completion in the Capstone course in spring. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 497S
499S. Senior Capstone in Visual & Media Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W Capstone seminar focusing on 
advanced visual studies theories, as well as individual senior projects undertaken as a written research paper 
or written paper plus a visual/media production. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Abe, Cobb, Olson, 
Stiles, Szabo, Weisenfeld. One course.
505S. Visual Studies from the Global South. ALP, CCI, CZ, R This seminar shifts the geography 
of critical theory, introducing interdisciplinary approaches to visual culture and art formulated outside the 
northern academies of Europe and the United States. Diverse readings introduce how the visual is constituted 
in sites that have endured colonialism and globalization. Specific topics include: word and image; space, place, 
and site; media and new technologies; indigenous and Afro-diasporic philosophies; and the raced and gendered 
body. Instructor: Gabara. One course. C-L: Art History 505S, Romance Studies 505S
506A. History of Netherlandish Art and Visual Culture in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, R A 
contextual study of visual culture in the Greater Netherlands and its underlying historical and socioeconomic 
assumptions from the late medieval to early modern period, through immediate contact with urban cultures, 
such as Amsterdam, Leiden, Utrecht, Brussels, Ghent, Bruges, and Antwerp. Includes daily visits to major 
museums, buildings, and sites; hands-on research in various collections; discussion sessions with leading 
scholars in the field; and a critical introduction to various research strategies. (Taught in the Netherlands.) Not 
open to students who have taken Art History 262A-263A. Course credit contingent upon completion of Art 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)166

History 507A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 506A, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
504A, International Comparative Studies
507A. History of Netherlandish Art and Visual Culture in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R Second half of Art History 506A-507A; required for credit for 506A. (Taught in the Netherlands.) Not open to 
students who have taken Art History 262A-263A. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 507A, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 505A, International Comparative Studies
510S. (Neosentience) Body as Electrochemical Computer. ALP, NS, R, STS Weekly discussions/
lectures related to different disciplinary understandings of the body, exploring new computational and 
aesthetic paradigms for brain/mind/body/ environment relations, and working towards articulating bridging 
languages enabling researchers to talk across disciplines. Students required to participate in ongoing discussion, 
develop particular aspects of research and write a major research paper. Instructor: Seaman. One course. C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 666S, Visual Arts 510S
512S. Performing Gender/Exhibiting Race. ALP, R Studying intersections of race/gender in art since 
1945 with host of visual subjects and methodological strategies. Examines works by e.g. Barkley L. Hendricks, 
David Hammons, Adrian Piper, Jean-Michel Basquiat, Faith Ringgold, Kara Walker. Traces theorizing gender/
race through historical documents and contemporary writings. Focus on images in documentary and fine art 
photography; silent and sound film; broadcast television and video art past/present. Assorted critical writings 
on mass media imagery. Opportunities for introduction of artists, art works, issues external to syllabus. 
Instructor: Powell. One course. C-L: Literature 512S
515S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 515S; also C-L: Literature 515S, International Comparative Studies 515S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 505S
520. Eco-Media: Studies in Planetary Futures. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
520; also C-L: Literature 522
520S. Eco-Media: Studies in Planetary Futures. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 520S; also C-L: Literature 522S
522S. Curatorial Practices in a Global Context. ALP History and critical theories of all experimental art 
from conceptual, performance, and installation to video and multimedia, collectives, and ecological and bioart 
considered in a global context including international exhibitions, biennials, and new curatorial practices. 
Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Art History 522S
523S. Imaging a Nation: Japanese Visual Culture 1868-1945. ALP, CCI, CZ Focusing on various 
visual representations of Japanese national identity at home and abroad during the empire; contending 
interpretations of “Japaneseness” and changing discourses on Japanese aesthetics in relation to broader 
historical developments; examining cultural production, exhibition practices, patronage, nationalism, neo-
traditionalism, Pan-Asianism, and the role of visual culture under imperialism. Instructor: Weisenfeld. One 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 566S
524S. AfroFuturism. ALP One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 620S; also C-L: Dance 
535S, Theater Studies 535S
525S. Art and the Holocaust: Architecture, Art, and Cultural Politics during the Nazi Period. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, EI This course will analyze the history of the genocide of the European Jews, and its connection 
to antisemitic art and cultural policy during the Nazi period. With a sound understanding of the development of 
oppressive policies against the Jews, and looking at a variety of media (painting, architecture, film, photography, 
design), the course will explore the complicated relationship between developing racist policies and the world 
war as they impacted and were in turn influenced by artists. Examines not only artists involved in the Nazi state, 
but also those who resisted in exile or were its victims. Instructor: Jaskot. One course. C-L: Art History 555S, 
German 565S, Jewish Studies 555S, History 531S
533S. Live Images: Ancient and Medieval Representations of the Divine. ALP, CCI, CZ, W The 
study of ancient and medieval works—speaking statues, miraculous icons, moving paintings. Seminar addresses 
questions of artistic and pictorial agency. Readings include theoretical texts, primary sources, and historical 
studies. Instructor: Wharton and Dillon. One course. C-L: Religion 552S, Classical Studies 558S, Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 507S



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 167

535S. Camera Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Examines how the art and technology of photography have 
changed how we study and understand the historical past, with a focus on China, India, and Japan. Analyzes 
arrival of the camera as a historical event, along with photographers and studios. Evaluates ways in which the 
new technology was embraced, and considers how the camera reconfigured attitudes towards the body and 
gender relations, nation building, war, catastrophes and death. Instructor: Weisenfeld and Ramaswamy. One 
course. C-L: History 530S, International Comparative Studies 531S, Art History 535S
539S. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 539S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 539S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 502S, Literature 539S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 539S, Human Rights
540S. Memory and Documentary Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Romance 
Studies 540S; also C-L: Documentary Studies 540S, Literature 544S, Latin American Studies 540S
541. Anime: Origins, Forms, Mutations. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
561
542. Creative Industries and the Urban Environment. SS This Bass Connections course examines 
the relationship between urban development and cultural production in specific contemporary and historical 
contexts, past and present. Cultural industries generally include printing, publishing and multimedia art, 
audiovisual, phonographic and cinematographic productions, as well as art creation, marketing and design 
and local art markets in the urban environment. The aim is to analyze the impact of creative industries on the 
economic development of a city and what one can learn from historical and present-day examples through the 
analysis of data. Analytical methods, theories and practices will be interwoven throughout the course. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 552, Information Science + Studies 
552
545. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images. ALP, EI This course interrogates still and moving images 
by and about people of African descent. Students enrolled in this course will consider film, photography, 
and media art. Together, we will examine documentary film, daguerreotype and archival photography, black 
cinema, and the cultural politics that render production, reception and circulation particular for black subjects. 
Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 539, Art History 539, Documentary 
Studies
548S. Japanese Design in a Global World. ALP, CZ, STS Japanese design encompasses everything 
from sushi to Hello Kitty—from Shiseido to Nintendo. This course examines the diverse and vibrant spheres 
of contemporary Japanese design culture across the globe. It is both an introduction to design practices and a 
forum for the critical evaluation of theoretical issues related to the larger field of design. Exploring the diverse 
fields of fashion, graphic design & packaging, industrial design, corporate branding, culinary culture, robotics, 
electronics, gaming, animation, and toys, the class will be introduced to the global impact of Japanese design 
on daily life around the world and the dynamic transnational culture in which it participates. Instructor: 
Weisenfeld. One course. C-L: Art History 548S
549S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and SF. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 549S
550S. Debates in the Digital Humanities: Multi-Disciplinary Theory and Practice. ALP, STS One 
course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 560S
551SL. Advanced Digital Art History: New Representational Technologies. ALP, CZ, STS Research 
and study in material culture and the visual arts expressed by using new visual technologies to record and 
communicate complex sets of visual and physical data from urban and/or archaeological sites. Introduces 
techniques for the presentation and interpretation of visual material through a series of interpretative and 
reconstructive technologies, including the development of web pages (HTML/Dreamweaver), Photoshop, 
Illustrator, Google Sketch-up, Google Maps, and Flash. To develop techniques of interpretation and 
representation. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Dillon, Olson, or Szabo. One course. C-L: Art History 
551SL, Information Science + Studies 551SL
552. Citizen Godard. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see French 510; also C-L: Literature 510
553S. From Caricature to Comic Strip. ALP, CCI, CZ, R History of caricature as a medium for political 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)168

critique and social comment from the eighteenth century to the present, focusing on England, France, Germany, 
and the United States. Languages of graphic satire in the context of specific historical moments, from the War 
of Independence to the war in Iraq; history of popular journalism and the comic press; censorship and agitation 
for press freedom; growth of specialized juvenile graphic magazines and the development of the strip cartoon. 
Instructor: McWilliam. One course.
554S. Experimental Communities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Interdisciplinary seminar examining visual culture 
and experimental social structures. Readings across academic spectrum focusing on alternative corporate 
models and workers’ unions, early soviet social networks, neighborhood associations, anarchist communes, art 
collectives, minority alliances, reality TV, fan clubs and fundamentalist organizations, encouraging students 
to fuse theories of social change with practice to produce new social structures. Class productions may include 
research papers, performances, experimental theater, social actions, new media works, as well as conventional 
art forms. Work will be judged by its formal sophistication or aesthetic merits, its social or political relevance, 
and its engagement with methods of ethical inquiry studied throughout the semester. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Lasch. One course. C-L: Sociology 636S, Visual Arts 554S
555S. Black Visual Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Approaches to studying and theorizing of African 
diasporal arts and black subjectivity, with a special emphasis on art historiography, iconology, and criticism, 
and a particular focus on slavery, emancipation, freedom, and cultural nationalism, as pertaining to peoples of 
African descent and as manifested in such visual forms as paintings, sculptures, graphics, and media arts from 
the early modern period to the present, as well as the political edicts, philosophical tracts, autobiographies, 
and theoretical writings of individuals similarly preoccupied with these ideas. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Powell. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 589S
556S. Latin American Modernism and Visual Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Early twentieth-century 
modernist movements in Spanish America, Brazil, and the Caribbean. Topics include: race, primitivism, and 
indigenism; gender; theory of the avant-garde; peripheral modernity; and nationalism, regionalism, and 
cosmopolitanism. Instructor: Gabara. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies
557S. Trauma in Art, Literature, Film, and Visual Culture. ALP, CZ, EI Theories of trauma applied to 
visual representations of violence, destruction, and pain in contemporary art, film, and literature, examining the 
topic through multiple subjects from the Holocaust, cults, gangs, racism, and sexual abuse to cultures of trauma. 
Theories of trauma examined from a variety of sources including clinical psychology, cultural and trauma 
studies, art, film, and literature, aiming to enable students to gain the visual acuity to identify, understand, and 
respond to traumatic images with empathy. Not open to students who have previously taken this course as Art 
History 295S. Instructor: Stiles. One course. C-L: Art History 557S
559S. Urbanism. ALP, CCI, CZ Introduction to urbanism through considerations of the political, social and 
economic forces that model urban space. Assessment of the expression in urban topography of state power, 
disempowered communities, competing ethnicities, religious groups. Readings include canonical works of 
urban history (Vitruvius, Jacobs), theory (Benjamin, Lefebvre), novels and media (Visconti, Zola).] Instructor: 
Wharton. One course.
560S. Poverty of the Visual. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Interdisciplinary seminar on the relationship between 
visuality and poverty from 1945 to the present. Theorizes visual culture through an examination of the forms of 
knowledge produced by impoverished populations. Uses philosophical and perceptual methods to explore the 
limits and limitations of visuality as it applies to science, ethics, the humanities, and the arts. Readings in the 
humanities and social sciences focus on issues related to lack, scarcity, absence, minimalism, and invisibility. 
Students encouraged to fuse theory and practice in research presentations and visual productions. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Lasch. One course.
561S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar. ALP, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 650S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 650S, Literature 621S, Art 
History 537S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
562S. Technology and New Media: Academic Practice. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Information 
Science + Studies 540S; also C-L: Art History 536S
563. Media and Democracy. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 674; also C-L: Information Science 
+ Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 169

564S. Physical Computing. QS, STS Seminar in physical computing, creative coding, and the emerging 
artistic possibilities of the Internet of Things. Emphasis on the medial physicality of computation, and 
exploration of interfaces to the computational that depart from the keyboard, mouse, and screen. Discussion 
of the social implications of “smart” objects. Hands-on development of individual and group projects using 
Arduino, an extension of C/C++, internet-enabled microprocessors, and an array of analog and digital 
sensors and actuators. Topics also include networking, communication protocols, circuit design, and physical 
prototyping. Instructor: Olson. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 555S, Visual Arts 564S, 
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 564S
565S. New Media, Memory, and the Visual Archive. ALP, STS Explores impact of new media on the 
nature of archives as technologies of cultural memory and knowledge production. Sustained engagement with 
major theorists of the archive through the optics of “media specificity” and the analytical resources of visual 
studies. Themes include: storage capacity of media; database as cultural form; body as archive; new media 
and the documentation of “everyday life;” memory, counter-memory, and the politics of the archive; archival 
materiality and digital ephemerality. Primary focus on visual artifacts (image, moving image) with consideration 
of the role of other sensory modalities in the construction of individual, institutional and collective memory. 
Instructor: Olson. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 565S, Policy Journalism and Media
566S. How They Got Game: History and Culture of Interactive Simulations and Video Games. 
ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 510S
567S. Art and Markets. ALP, CCI, R, SS Cross-disciplinary art history-visual culture-economics seminar. 
Analytical and applied historical exploration of cultural production and local art markets, and their emergence 
throughout Europe, Asia, and the Americas. Criteria for valuation of imagery or what makes art as a commodity 
desirable or fashionable. Visual taste formation, consumer behavior, and the role of art dealers as cross-cultural 
negotiants. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Van Miegroet. One course. C-L: Art History 508S, 
Economics 321S, Markets and Management Studies
569S. Information Archeology: Studies in the Nature of Information and Artifact in the Digital 
Environment. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 680S; also C-L: Art History 542S
570S. Poverty and the Visual. ALP, CCI, CZ Relationship between art, visual culture, and poverty from 
1950s to present across cultures. Readings across broad range of texts in humanities and social sciences. 
Research, visual analyses, and student productions based on a broader understanding of poverty as a 
philosophical, economic, social, and cultural concept. Three-part definition of poverty includes: special focus 
on cultural contributions of grassroots social movements and impoverished sectors of global society, poverty as 
an intentional set of aesthetic or cultural constraints, and poverty as a critical term to understand historical and 
contemporary limitations of visuality. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Lasch. One course. C-L: Visual 
Arts 556S, Sociology 556S
570SL. Roman Topography: Urban Life and Cityscapes in Ancient Rome. CCI, CZ, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Classical Studies 556SL; also C-L: Art History 560SL
571S. Art as Work: Valuing Labor in the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Dance 561S; 
also C-L: Literature 525S, Visual Arts 571S
575S. Generative Media Authorship - Music, Text & Image. ALP Covers Generative Media in all its 
forms. Lectures, workshops, discussions, one semester-length project, shorter individual exercises and readings. 
Interdisciplinary Graduate Seminar with advanced undergraduates and MFA students with permission of 
instructor. Instructor: Seaman and Supko. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 575S, Music 575S, 
Visual Arts 575S, Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 575S
580S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 1. ALP, STS Interactivity and online content 
management through databases, collaborative blogs, and other systems. Data visualization based on textual, 
image, and quantitative sources. Basic techniques for virtual reality, simulations, augmented reality, and 
game-based historical and cultural visualization project development. Mini-projects based on existing and new 
research data from the Smith Media Labs and other sources. Best practices for digital research project planning 
and collaboration. Theoretical topics include: critical digital heritage, virtuality and culture, information 
aesthetics, hypermedia information design. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson or Szabo. One 
course. C-L: Historical and Cultural Visualization 580S, Information Science + Studies 580S, Art History 580S, 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)170

Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 580S
581S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 2. ALP, STS 2D and 3D imaging, modeling; 
raster and vector graphics sources, laser scanners, photogrammetric software, basic database structures. 
Digital mapping and GIS. Presentation strategies and best practices for the web (standards-compliant 
HTML/CSS/Javascript), multimedia (audio/video/animation), scholarly annotation, intellectual property. 
Theoretical, ethical issues in field of new media and digital humanities. Epistemological issues re: mediation and 
visualization, ethics of intellectual property, politics of geospatial visualization, digital materiality, affordances of 
new media narrativity. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Olson or Szabo. One course. C-L: Historical and 
Cultural Visualization 581S, Information Science + Studies 581S, Art History 581S, Computational Media, Arts & 
Cultures 581S
590. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of 
disciplines related to visual and media studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Visual Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines 
related to visual studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
610S. Basic Concepts in Cinema Studies. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 610S
611S. Third Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 613S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 530S, International Comparative Studies 613S, Latin American Studies 613S
612S. Theories of the Image: The Image in Walter Benjamin. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 
612S; also C-L: German 512S, Romance Studies 612S
613S. Computational Media Studio in Advanced Digital Practice. ALP, STS Advanced digital 
practicum in interactive computational media as vehicle for creative and critical expression. Opportunity to 
synthesize previous course work in multimedia practice, web/graphic/motion design, 3D modeling/gaming, 
computer programming. In-depth exploration of computational media production as artistic practice through 
exercises, projects, and critiques. Acquisition and refinement of expertise in procedural and object-oriented 
programming, two- and three-dimensional graphics, data visualization, physical computing, AR/VR, and other 
emergent computational platforms. Sustained engagement with computational ethics. Instructor: Olson, Szabo, 
Wendell. One course. C-L: Historical and Cultural Visualization 613S, Information Science + Studies 613S, 
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 613S
614S. Thinking Digital Cinema. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 614S; also C-L: Theater Studies 
671S
615S. The #Selfie. CZ, EI, R, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 615S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 615S, International Comparative Studies 615S
620S. Models: Premodern to Posthuman. ALP, CZ, R Architectural models may be either powerful 
small-scale prototypes for buildings or weak copies of powerful archetypes. Consideration of variety of 
architectural models from urban projects to dollhouses allows historical and theoretical exploration of models’ 
agency. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Wharton. One course. C-L: Art History 620S
621S. Black Performance Theory. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
621S; also C-L: Dance 645S
622S. Film-philosophers/Film-makers. ALP, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 620S; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 620S, English 620S, Documentary Studies 620S
625S. Comparative Media Studies. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 625S; also C-L: Information 
Science + Studies 615S
629. Projections in Time: The Still and Moving Image. ALP, R Project-based studio course exploring 
time through film, video, and still photography. Management, presentation and trace of time discussed in 
relation to various forms of art, augmented by examination of concepts of duration, aura, silence and thought 
as they pertain to still and moving images. Individual and group projects investigate various manifestations of 
stillness and movement in film, video, and photography, with and without sound. Slices of time in both media 
examined for their properties of continuity, discontinuity and fissure, with emphasis on rendering meaning 
in and through time and space. Prerequisite: Two 200-level or above photography or film production classes. 



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 171

Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 630, Documentary Studies 630
630S. Phenomenology and Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 630S; also C-L: 
Art History 630S, Information Science + Studies 630S
631S. Seminar on Modern Chinese Cinema. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
631S; also C-L: Literature 631S
632. Questions of National Cinemas. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 631; also 
C-L: Literature 632
632S. Whitehead, Bergson, James. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 632S; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 632S, Art History 632S
634S. Producing Docu-Fiction. ALP Investigation of hybrid, genre-defying films that question traditional 
definitions of documentary and fiction. Emphasis on experimental forms, documentary reenactment, 
mockumentary and dramatized “true stories.” Exploration of both documentary and fiction production 
techniques, culminating in the production of a final video project. Same as Visual and Media Studies 340S but 
with additional graduate level work. Instructor: Gibson. One course.
635S. 16mm Film Production. ALP Hands-on experience with 16mm motion picture film and photography. 
In-depth exploration of the techniques and aesthetics of film production, including basic screen writing, lighting, 
story telling, and editing. Each student will produce an individual 16mm film. Same as Visual and Media Studies 
362S but with additional graduate level work. Instructor: Staff. One course.
640S. Expanded Cinema: Cinema Outside the Movie Theater. ALP This project-based course will 
explore moving image installation practices beyond the movie theater including alternative public spaces, 
devices, museums, white cubes and back boxes. The course will simultaneously examine relevant artworks in 
the context of their diverse histories and attendant theories, from early cinema devices, through works termed 
as Expanded Cinema around the 1970s, to current new media manifestations. Students will focus on developing 
moving image installation projects of their own, to be realized at various campus locations. Open to seniors and 
graduate students. Prerequisite: Two 200-level or above photography or film production classes. Instructor: 
Kaul. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 640S, Documentary Studies 640S, Literature 545S
641SL. Narrative Practice in Global Art Cinema. ALP, CCI Advanced in-depth examination of 
alternative narrative and doc-fiction practices emerging from national cinemas around the world. Intended for 
advanced undergraduate and graduate students with prior production experience. Screenings and readings 
related to significant national cinema movements and practitioners will inform production exercises, writing 
assignments and a final moving image project. Instructor: Gibson. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 641SL
650S. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images. ALP, CCI This course interrogates still and moving 
images by and about people of African descent. Graduate students enrolled in this course will consider 
film, photography, and media art. Together, we will examine documentary film, daguerreotype and archival 
photography, black cinema, and the cultural politics that render production, reception and circulation particular 
for black subjects. Instructor: Cobb. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 531S, Art History 
650S, Documentary Studies
660S. Digital Places and Spaces: Mirror, Hybrid, and Virtual Worlds. ALP, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Information Science + Studies 660S
662S. Mapping Culture: Geographies of Space, Mind, and Power. ALP, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 662S
685S. Visiting Filmmaker Master Course: Special Topics. ALP Intensive production courses with 
visiting filmmaker. Topics vary by semester. May be taken twice. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S. Special Topics in Visual and Media Studies. Subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of 
disciplines related to visual and media studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
691. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Consent of instructor and director of graduate studies 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
692. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 



 Visual and Media Studies (VMS)172

member, resulting in a substantive paper or report. Consent of instructor and director of graduate studies 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major
The student will elect a sequence of courses emphasizing the history of art, visual arts, visual and media 

studies, or the combined major in art history/visual arts.

Art History
Major Requirements. The major in art history requires at least eleven courses, eight of which must be at 

the 200-level or above. The following courses are required: one (1) Foundations (100-level) course, one (1) Visual 
Arts (practice-based) course, and two (2) upper-level (400-699-level) seminars. Students pursuing Graduation 
with Distinction take the Honors Thesis Workshop (Art History 495S) as one of the upper-level seminars. The 
remaining eight courses must be in at least four of the following five geographical areas, and one course in each of 
the three chronological periods: Europe and the Mediterranean, Asia and the Pacific, the Americas, Middle East 
and Africa, Trans-cultural; Prehistoric-1200, 1200-1800, and 1800-present. Individual courses can fulfill both a 
Geographical and a Chronological requirement.

The requirements and prerequisites for the major can be satisfied by courses taken at other institutions or 
abroad, but no more than two courses taken away from Duke may count toward the major. Further courses are 
available for credit at North Carolina State University and The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Students planning to attend graduate school should consider taking two 500 to 699-level seminars: Art 
History 543S (Methodology of Art History), and a second seminar in the same field as a 200-level course already 
taken by the student. For example, Art History 255 (Art in Renaissance Italy), is a logical preparation for Art 
History 590S-4 (Topics in Italian Renaissance Art). Two years of a foreign language at the college level are strongly 
recommended.

Concentration in Architecture
The department offers a BA degree in art history with a concentration in architecture. Certification of 

this concentration is designated on the official transcript. Thirteen courses are required in four broad areas: 
(1) Either Art History 491/493 or 492/494 on a subject approved by the concentration in architecture advisor, 
or a relevant 500-699-level seminar; (2) seven additional courses in art history, including at least three of the 
following: Art History 225, 226, 258, 382, 285 or 286D, or topics courses that focus on space or architecture 
in visual and media studies or art history; (3) two courses in the visual arts; (4) three courses in mathematics, 
physics, and/or engineering courses that offer or require advanced math or physics skills (recommended courses 
include Mathematics 111L, 112L, and 212; Physics 141L or 142L; Civil and Environmental Engineering 311 or 411). 
Distribution requirements for the major must be fulfilled. 

Concentration in Museum Theory and Practice
The department offers a BA degree in art history with a concentration in museum theory and practice. 

Certification of this concentration is designated on the official transcript. The concentration allows students insight 
into the nature and ideology of the museum as a cultural institution, while also providing hands-on experience, 
working closely with museum staff to gain essential career preparation. 

Students must take at least one of the following, preferably in their Junior year—Museum Theory and 
Practice (Art History 220); The Museum Object: Art and Artifacts on Display (Art History 221S). Students must 
also take Museum Internship 1 (Art History 310); and one of the following: Museum Internship 2 (Art History 
311); Curatorial Practicum (Art History 455S); History and Theory of Curatorial Practice (Art History 222S). Those 
students who do not take both Art History 220 and Art History 221S must select two of the following courses: Art 
History 311, Art History 455S, Art History 222S. Students must take seven courses in Art History, including one (1) 
Foundations (100-level) course and at least one practice-based Visual Arts course. The two Wired! proseminars 
(Visual and Media Studies 580S and Visual and Media Studies 581S) and “The Lives of Things” (Visual and 
Media Studies 590) are recommended as offering opportunities to engage with digital technologies for museum 
installations and public outreach. Distribution requirements for the major must be fulfilled.

Visual Arts
Major Requirements. The visual arts major requires twelve courses. Courses for the major include: three 

courses at the 100 level in a variety of disciplines, four courses at the intermediate/advanced level (between 200-



Visual and Media Studies (VMS) 173

699), Visual Arts 497S (Advanced Visual Practice), Visual Arts 496S or 498S Senior Capstone in the Visual Arts, 
one course at any level in art history, one course at any level in visual and media studies, and one additional course 
in either art history or visual and media studies at the 200 level or above. 

The requirements for the major can be satisfied by courses taken at other institutions or abroad, but no 
more than two courses taken away from Duke may count toward the major. Further courses are available for 
credit at North Carolina State University and The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Visual and Media Studies
Major Requirements. The visual and media studies major requires thirteen courses, at least eight of 

which must be at the 200 level or above. Courses required for the major include Visual and Media Studies 202D 
(Introduction to Visual Culture), Visual and Media Studies 327S (Theories of Visual and Media Studies), and the 
capstone course Visual and Media Studies 499S (Visual and Media Studies Capstone) or an approved upper-level 
seminar, as well as ten additional courses to be divided as follows: two courses in visual and media history or art 
history; two courses in visual and media practice; three visual and media studies electives taught by faculty in 
AAHVS; and three previously approved cross-listed courses in another department. 

The requirements and prerequisites for the major can be satisfied by courses taken at other institutions or 
abroad, but no more than two courses taken away from Duke may count toward the major. Further courses are 
available for credit at North Carolina State University and The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

Concentration in Cinematic Arts
The department offers a BA degree in visual and media studies with a concentration in cinematic arts. 

Certification of this concentration is designated on the official transcript. The concentration allows students deep 
engagement and mentoring in a range of approaches within the cinematic arts; from film/video production and 
digital imaging to the myriad ways in which time-based media can become an element of mixed media works and 
installation art; building on our distinctive strengths in film production and studies on campus. The concentration 
enables students to extend and focus their study within multiple fields of practice, film history, and theory.

Thirteen courses are required for the concentration, including one gateway course (either  Visual and Media 
Studies  202D  or Visual and Media Studies 289) taken preferably in the first or sophomore  year, one theory-
focused course, four practice and two film studies courses taken from an approved list, and the Visual and Media 
Studies 496S Cinematic Arts Capstone class in the spring semester of the senior year. Students must take four 
additional elective courses including one course in media history/art history.

Combined Major in Art History/Visual Arts
Major Requirements. A combined major in art history and visual arts requires at least fourteen courses. 

These include: Visual Arts 199 (Drawing) and Art History 104 (Exploring Art and Architecture); and twelve upper-
level courses. The twelve upper-level courses are to be divided as follows: 

• Art History: Six upper-level courses distributed across the fields of ancient, medieval, Renaissance/
Baroque, modern, and non-Western (pre-Columbian, African, Asian). Students must take at least one 
course in four of these five areas. At least one of these courses must be a 500- to 699-level seminar. 

• Visual Arts: Six 200-level courses including a minimum of one course in at least three of the following 
primary areas of instruction: arts of the moving image, graphic design, painting, photography, print 
making, and sculpture. Students are encouraged to enroll as seniors in an independent study and, 
during the spring of that year, in Visual Arts 390S (Special Topics in Visual Arts).

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers work leading to Graduation with Distinction. See the section on honors in this 

bulletin.

The Minor
Two transfer courses may count toward the requirements for the minor; courses taken Satisfactory/

Unsatisfactory or Advanced Placement credits do not count toward the minor.

Art History
Requirements: Five courses in art history at the 200 level or above.



 Arts & Sciences (ARTS&SCI)174

Cinematic Arts
Requirements: Five courses, which must include at least one gateway course (either Visual and Media 

Studies 202D, Visual and Media Studies 289, or Visual and Media Studies 261S) taken preferably in the first or 
sophomore year. Additionally, students must take at least one film practice course and at least one film studies 
course (both from a list of approved a Cinematic Arts courses). The fifth course may be either film practice or film 
studies.

Photography
Requirements: Five courses related to photography, with the following courses required: Visual Arts 115 

(Introduction to Photography) or Visual Arts 119S (Introduction to Digital Photography); Art History 303 (History 
of Photography); and Visual Arts 492 (Individual Project).

Visual Arts
Requirements: Five courses in visual arts at the 200 level or above.

Visual and Media Studies
Requirements: Five courses to be distributed as follows: any three visual and media studies courses at the 

200 level or above taught by faculty in AAHVS and any two visual and media studies electives in any cross-listed 
discipline previously approved for the visual and media studies major.  Visual and Media Studies 202D is strongly 
encouraged.

Arts & Sciences
Courses in Arts & Sciences (ARTS&SCI)
89S. Special Topics: First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101D. Introduction to Inquiry and Research across Disciplines. W Students will analyze, discuss, and 
write about complex issues through multiple disciplinary frameworks to compose academic arguments about a 
relevant topic. Topics may include, but are not limited to, public health, big data, digital humanities, behavioral 
trends, and political climate. Students will learn about writing transfer as they explore research methods and 
epistemologies across disciplines, while evolving their writing and reasoning strategies in support of their 
academic arguments. This course is taught by faculty in the Thompson Writing Program. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190. Signature Course (Special Topics). Duke Signature Courses are wide-ranging, theme-based courses 
that integrate perspectives from across academic fields of inquiry and provide a common intellectual experience 
for students from a variety of fields and interests. Signature Courses feature some of Duke’s most renowned 
scholar-teachers exploring large themes, enduring questions, or compelling challenges of their disciplines and of 
our times. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
205S. Composing Oneself: Stress, Identity, and Wellness. ALP, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Writing 205S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 205S
206. Contemporary Documentary Film: Filmmakers and the Full Frame Documentary Film 
Festival. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 264; also C-L: Documentary Studies 
270, Political Science 276, Public Policy 374
390. University Course (Special Topics). Interdisciplinary course on topics of social relevance, sponsored 
by the Dean of Arts & Sciences. Topics vary each year. Instructor: Patton. One course.
390S. University Course (Special Topics). Seminar version of ARTS&SCI 390. Interdisciplinary course on 
topics of social relevance, sponsored by the Dean of Arts & Sciences. Topics vary each year. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Finnegan. One course.
493. Research Independent Study: Duke Connections. R Individual research in a field of special interest 
under the supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report 
containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



Arts & Sciences (ARTS&SCI) 175

Arts of the Moving Image
Associate Professor of the Practice Gibson, Director

The Arts of the Moving Image Program is not currently accepting new students.

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The Program in the Arts of the Moving Image provides students with the opportunity to study, analyze, and 

create film, video, television, digital media, and emergent computational art forms. Courses are taught in both 
the studies and the practices of Arts of the Moving Image. Students may concentrate in one of these areas, or take 
courses in both. 

Arts of the Moving Image Studies
 Students develop critical understanding of the history, theory, and art form of cinema and computational 

media technologies. Courses offered in Arts of the Moving Image studies include introduction to film, documentary 
film, film history, film genres, national cinemas, and new media. Course credit is also available for internships. 

Arts of the Moving Image Practice 
Students gain expertise in a wide range of technologies, from analog film creation and cell animation to 

digital video creation, motion graphics and computational programming. Courses offered in Arts of the Moving 
Image practice include narrative, animation, sound, editing, documentary and experimental filmmaking, and 
interactive media. Independent study credit is also available for individual projects for advanced students, but no 
more than two may count toward the certificate. 

Certificate Requirements
Students must take a minimum of six courses, which must include at least one gateway course, either Arts 

of the Moving Image 101 (Introduction to Arts of the Moving Image), Arts of the Moving Image 201 (Introduction 
to Film Studies), or Arts of the Moving Image 301S (Moving Image Practice), and Arts of the Moving Image 499S 
(Arts of the Moving Image Capstone Course). Additionally students must take at least one Arts of the Moving 
Image practice course, which may include Arts of the Moving Image 301S, and one Arts of the Moving Image 
studies course, which may include Arts of the Moving Image101 or Arts of the Moving Image 201, plus three other 
Arts of the Moving Image courses. For the certificate, students may take no more than three courses originating 
in a single department or program, other than those originating in the Program in the Arts of the Moving Image. 

Screen/Society
Arts of the Moving Image organizes and coordinates Screen/Society, an academically integrated program 

of public film and video screenings, sometimes accompanied by lectures, discussions, or filmmaker visits. Screen/
Society’s mission is to advance the academic study of moving image culture at Duke by collaborating with schools, 
departments, and programs throughout the university to relate film, video, and digital art to other disciplines, and 
to provide a venue for works from around the world.

Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
Associate Professor Ginsburg, Chair and Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Benmamoun, Ching, 
Liu, Rojas, and Safi; Associate Professors Ginsburg, Göknar, Hong, Kwon, and McLarney; Assistant Professor 
Bardawil; Professor Emerita miriam cooke; Professors of the Practice Hae-Young Kim and Lee; Associate Profes-
sors of the Practice Khanna and Lo; Assistant Professor of the Practice Chen; Associate Professor of the Practice 
Emerita Hitomi Endo; Senior Lecturers He and Kurokawa; Lecturers Houssami, E. Kim, Knapczyk, and Liu; 
Lecturing Fellows Boumaaza, Eun, Havlioglu, Hsieh, and Saito; Instructors Chou, Hsu, and Ye; Instructor B Saad 
Cheikh Abdi Vall; Secondary Appointments: Negar Mottahedeh (Literature); Visiting Associate Professor Chow; 
Visiting Lecturer Adel

A major and a minor are available in this program.



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)176

Asian & Middle Eastern Studies provides language instruction in Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, Hindi, Japanese, 
Korean, Persian, Tibetan and Turkish and classes on Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Persian 
and Turkish literatures and cultures in translation.

Courses in Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)
80S. Studies in Special Topics. Opportunities for first-year students to engage with a specific issue in Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies, with emphasis on student writing. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
105. Understanding the Middle East. CCI, SS Introduction to central political, geopolitical, cultural, 
and socio-economic issues in the Middle East, including revolution, protest, youth movements, war, conflict, 
imperialism, occupation, neocolonialism, oil, terrorism, religion, Islamism, Zionism, media, social media, 
culture, creativity, art, music, film, literature, women, gender, and sexuality. Regions covered will range from 
Morocco to Egypt to Palestine and Israel to Iraq and Iran to Saudi Arabia and the Gulf. A far reaching, but in 
depth exploration of the politics and culture of the Middle East today. Instructor: McLarney. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 205
107. Introduction to East Asian Cultures: Narrating East Asia through Word and Image. ALP, 
CCI, CZ The study of East Asia makes sense not necessarily as a study of shared canons or of ‘civilizational 
origins’ or, shared ‘Asian values’: rather, modern East Asia can be productively studied in terms of shared 
historical, political, cultural concerns; the influx of new ideologies; the processes of ‘becoming modern’; and 
of course, the positioning of East Asian area studies in the academy and the larger world. In this introductory 
course, we will be looking at “Global East Asia” and its diasporas through all manners of storytelling, focusing 
on word-image narratives: Asian traditions of manga, manhwa, manhua, as well as graphic novels. Instructor: 
Chow. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 144
111. Self, Society and Art in Modern Hinduism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 110
114. Buddhism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 120
115. Religions of Asia. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 175; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 108
120. Sound and Society in East Asian Contexts. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Music 234
122. Islamic Civilization I. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 375; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
256, History 210, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 268, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies, Islamic 
Studies
123. History and Culture of Iran. ALP, CCI, CZ, R A multi-disciplinary approach to Iran and Persian 
culture. Covers history, religion, politics, literature, music, and cinema. Focuses on the developments in Iran 
leading up to and after the 1979 revolution. Does not require any knowledge of Persian or previous background. 
Instructor: Safi. One course. C-L: History 248, Religion 283
125. Egypt: Mother of the World. ALP, CCI, CZ A cultural history of modern Egypt: the Arab spring; arts 
of the revolution; Egyptian cinema, popular culture, and literature; Islamic politics, Islamic thought, and Islamic 
mobilization; Arab nationalism and Gamal Abd al-Nasser; the economics of Egyptian politics; the Awakening 
(Nahda) of the 19th century; Muhammad Ali and the Ottoman empire; British and French conquests of Egypt; 
and orientalist knowledge about Egypt. Includes a trip to Egypt over break. Instructor: McLarney. One course. 
C-L: Islamic Studies, International Comparative Studies
126S. Understanding the Qur’an. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 370S
127. The Modern Middle East. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 214; also C-L: Jewish Studies 258, 
International Comparative Studies, Islamic Studies
129. Master Filmmakers of Chinese Cinemas. ALP, CCI, CZ Films, documentaries, television series, and 
soap operas produced in Mainland China in the post-Mao era, modern and contemporary Taiwan, and Hong 
Kong. Topics include the history and aesthetics of the new wave cinema, soap operas as the new forum for public 
debate o popular culture, and debate over the relationship between Euro-American modernist and the national 
cinema. C-L Film Video. Instructor: Hong. One course. C-L: Literature 214, Visual and Media Studies 235



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 177

132S. Chinese Literature and Culture in Translation. ALP, CCI, CZ The transmutation of Chinese 
culture and literature from the perspective of translation conceived as a broad range of literary and cultural 
activities, including transactions between cultures, appropriation of a foreign work into a Chinese version, and 
adaptation of one literary-cultural form into another (such as literature into drama or film). Instructor: Hong. 
One course. C-L: Literature 248S
136. China from Antiquity to 1400. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 220
137S. Gateway Seminar: China at War. CZ, W One course. C-L: see History 184S
138. Scripture: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 156; 
also C-L: Jewish Studies 156
141S. Audiovisual Cultures in East Asia: Film, Music, and Other Media. ALP, CCI, CZ This seminar 
introduces to students to various aspects of audiovisual cultures in East Asia, including film, photography, music 
and other new and emerging media. It focuses on visual and sound studies and their interconnected relationship 
to the constitution of the sensible world within the East Asian regions while connecting to the larger global 
context,highlighting the global movement and cross-cultural networks of audiovisual media both enabled and 
complicated by technologies. Emphases are also placed on hand-on practice with individual and group projects. 
The goal is to not only understand audiovisual cultures critically but also actively engage in their production. 
Instructor: Hong. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 141S
142. History of Chinese Medicine. CCI, CZ, STS, W One course. C-L: see History 239; also C-L: Global 
Health 142
143. Contemporary Israeli Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI A comparative approach to Israeli cinema, in the 
context of American and European cinemas. Cinema and nationalism. Cinematic representations of social, 
political, racial, and ethnic tensions and fissures: social gap, immigration to and emigration from Israel, 
militarism and civil society, masculinity and femininity, and the Israeli-Arab conflict. Popular culture and its 
relationship with high culture. Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 248, Literature 
217, Jewish Studies 241, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 214, Islamic Studies
144. Introduction to Israeli Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ Surveys of Israeli culture from the late 1940s to the 
present. Examines Israeli fiction, cinema, popular music, visual culture. Major themes include ethnicity, the 
Israeli-Palestinian conflict, class, the Jewish Holocaust, religion and secularism. Legal and economic aspects of 
culture. Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 245
145. Chinese Music Ensemble. Half course. C-L: see Music 210-6
150. Chinese Art 1900 to Present. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 294; 
also C-L: International Comparative Studies
151. Indian Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Sources of vitality in twentieth-century Indian cinema. The resilience 
of popular cinema in the face of Hollywood. Narrative and non-narrative expressive forms in folk and high 
culture in India. The work of Guru Dutt, Satyajit Ray, G. Aravindan, and Mani Kaul. Instructor: Khanna. One 
course. C-L: Literature 211, Visual and Media Studies 231
157S. Indian Civilization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 219S; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 215S
158. Gandhi: Image and Reflection. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 279; also C-L: Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 279, Human Rights
160. Islam. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 160; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 160, 
Islamic Studies
161. Japanese Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ An introduction to the history of Japanese cinema focusing on issues 
including the relation between the tradition-modernity or Japan-West in the development of Japanese cinema, 
the influence of Japanese films on the theory and practice of cinema abroad, and the ways in which cinema has 
served as a reflection of and an active agent in the transformation of Japanese society. Instructor: Chow. One 
course. C-L: Literature 213, Visual and Media Studies 232
161. Anime: Origins, Forms, Mutations. ALP, CCI Historical origins of Japanese anime, as well as its 
status as art, narrative, genre. Ways in which anime mutates: formally (literature, manga, live action), culturally 



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)178

(fashion, otaku, fan communities), geographically. No prior knowledge of subject matter or Japanese language 
required. Instructor: Chow. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 216
165S. The World of Japanese Pop Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ An examination of modern Japanese culture 
through a variety of media including literary texts, cultural representations, and films. Different material each 
year. Instructor: Ching. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 365S
167. Ancient and Early Modern Japan. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 226; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies
169. The Emergence of Modern Japan. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 227
171. World of Korean Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI The world of Korean cinema, broadly defined in terms 
of national, generic, theoretical boundaries, beyond conventional auteur, genre, one-way influence, and 
national cinema theories. Cinematic texts examined in local, regional, and global contexts and intersections, 
in conversation with global theories and histories of cinema, visual cultures, and other representational forms. 
Variable topics informed theoretically and politically by discourses on gender/sexuality, race/ethnicity, global 
flows of people and cultures, popular and “high” culture crossovers, transnational co-productions, remakes, 
translations and retellings. No knowledge of Korean language/ culture presumed. Instructor: Kwon. One course. 
C-L: Literature 212, Visual and Media Studies 234, Cultural Anthropology 255
172S. Korean Literature and Culture in Translation: Local and Global Connections. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Critical examination of variable topics in Korean literature. Texts contextualized in global and local histories. 
Boundaries of the nation and its narration interrogated. Themes may range from gender and sexuality, diaspora, 
global/local literary histories, translation, language and power, canonization, and (post)coloniality. Instructor: 
Kwon. One course. C-L: Literature 239S
174. Japanese Religions: Buddhas, Gods, and Monsters. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 176
175S. North Korea: Politics, Economics and Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Critical examination of the 
political and economic with social, cultural, and religious dimensions of North Korea. Topics includes North 
Korea’s leadership, religious (especially cultic) aspects of the North Korean Juche ideology, the daily lives of its 
citizens, religious traditions, the Korean War, nuclear development and missiles, North Korean defectors and 
refugees in other Asian countries, human rights, international relationships, and unification. Instructor: Kwon. 
One course.
177S. Gateway Seminar: Gandhi, King, Mandela. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 163S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 163S, International Comparative Studies 163S
178S. Migration and Human Rights in Korea: Local and Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Introduces students to the history and contemporary conditions of North Korean refugees and other 
migrants in South Korea from across the region (Pakistan, China, Nepal, Vietnam, Russia, Philippines, 
etc.). Examines competing claims about past and ongoing challenges emerging from economic, ethno-
racial, ideological, and geopolitical differences. Takes interdisciplinary approaches to study various sources 
including historical writings, human rights discourses, policy papers, debates in journalism, law, and religion, 
documentary films, testimonies, and autobiographies. Course is taught in conjunction with the Duke Engage 
Korea program and open to all students with overlapping interests. Instructor: Kim and Kwon. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 105S, Religion 180S
179FS. Turkey: Muslim and Modern. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 
279FS; also C-L: History 239FS, Islamic Studies
179S. Turkey: Muslim and Modern. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 279S; 
also C-L: History 239S
182. Asian American Theatre. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 232; also C-L: English 387
183. The China Dream. ALP, CZ, STS A study of the status of dreams in modern Chinese culture, with an 
emphasis on the ramifications of the contemporary political slogan “the Chinese dream.” Will consider literary, 
cinematic, social, and theoretical texts. Instructor: Rojas. One course.
185. Islamic Civilization II. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 376; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
257, History 211, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 269, International Comparative Studies, Ethics Elective, 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 179

Islamic Studies
186. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Readings in cultural 
history and literature to examine transformations in Turkish identity from the Ottoman era to EU accession. 
Discussion of the “gazi thesis”, the “sultanate of women”, religious tolerance (millets), conversion, modernity 
and nationalism. Secondary topics include Sufism, Islam, gender, and historiography. Interdisciplinary focus. 
Taught in English. Instructor: Goknar. One course. C-L: Religion 228, History 212, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 
287, Islamic Studies
187S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 183S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 133S, International Comparative Studies 183S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 183S, Public Policy 175S, Human Rights
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern 
Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. AMES Special Topics-Focus Program. Topics vary each semester. Open only to students in the 
Focus Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Asian & Middle Eastern Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern 
Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
195S. Gateway Seminar: Rethinking Asia and the Middle East. CCI, CZ Studies intellectual concepts 
and cultural frameworks from Asia at large; compares normative European and North American conceptions 
of East Asia and the Middle East with contemporary challenges; examines how they internalize, negotiate 
and resisted Eurocentric knowledge; and focuses on nation, gender and race. Instructor: Ching, Ginsburg, 
McLarney. One course.
201S. The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict in Films. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Explores cinematic representations 
of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict; probes the history and the current state of the conflict through its visual 
representations. Focuses on representations of violence: of state violence vs. non-state terrorism; probes the 
relationship between spectatorship and violence. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 206S
202S. Francophone Literature. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 417S; also C-L: History 387S, 
Latin American Studies
204FS. Documenting the Middle East: Community and Oral History. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Studies the 
documentary record of the Middle East in photography, film, and oral history. From early studio photography 
to recent community and student production, considers documentary expression’s meaning and function. 
Analyzes the role of digital humanities and social media in documentary research. Uses best practices of 
documentary work. Includes a hands-on documentary component: recording diverse voices from Iraqi, Syrian, 
and Palestinian communities. Student-produced fieldwork from the class will be permanently housed at Duke’s 
Archive of Documentary Arts. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. 
Instructor: Kalow. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 204FS, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 204FS, Human Rights
205FS. Literary Islam: Poetry, Scripture, Philosophy. ALP, CCI, CZ A broad overview of the most 
essential elements of the Islamic literary tradition. Begins with pre-Islamic poetry and how it framed the 
emergence of the Qur’an, hadith (sayings of the Prophet Muhammad), and the early Islamic community. Looks 
at the early Meccan verses of the Qur’an in comparison to with the later Madinan ones. Traces intertwined oral 
and scriptural traditions, hadith science and biographical literature, poetry and philosophy, mysticism and 
rationalism, belles lettres and adab, satire and vernacular literature. Ends with modern takes on classic genres 
and sources. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: McLarney. 
One course.
206S. Muslim Ethics and Islamic Law: Issues and Debates. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 
388S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 345S
207. Silk Roads and China, Ancient and Medieval Transformations. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
History 135; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 135, Religion 181



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)180

208FS. Geopolitics and Culture from ISIS to Afghanistan. ALP, CCI, CZ Study of countries on the 
geographical periphery of the commonly defined Middle East: Bosnia, Turkey, Armenia, Chechnya, Iran, and 
Afghanistan. All of these countries have deep Middle Eastern ties and traditions, sizeable communities with 
Middle Eastern origins and connections, and recent histories of cultural and ethnic conflict and violence. 
Exploration of how the Middle Eastern components and histories in these conflicts have been distorted and 
obscured as the conflicts have been depicted through the lenses of U.S. or Soviet/Russian geopolitical interests. 
Instructor: Goknar. One course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 209FS, Cultural Anthropology 211FS
208S. Geopolitics and Culture: Islamic States from the Ottomans to ISIS. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Geopolitical, comparative study of “Islamic states” and majority Muslim nations/polities of the greater 
Middle East including the Ottomans, Bosnia, Egypt, Algeria, Chechnya, Iran, Afghanistan and ISIS. All of these 
polities have experienced profound contestation between Islamic and secular state traditions and have recent 
histories of cultural and ethnic conflict and political violence. Exploration through history, culture, policy and 
theory of state-formation, revolution, and coup. Analysis through the lenses of US, European and regional 
geopolitical interests. Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 217S, Public 
Policy 213S, History 379S
210. Arab Cultures: Literature, Politics, History. ALP, CCI, CZ Explore different facets of modern 
and contemporary Arab cultures; memoirs, novels, prison notebooks, films, comic books, theoretical tracts, 
music, psychiatric case-studies, histories, and ethnographies; consider how authors depict key historical 
transformations taking place in the Arab world; different angles through which political questions are tackled; 
the negotiation between self and other. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Literature 251, Cultural Anthropology 
209
211. Melodrama East and West. ALP, CCI Melodrama as a genre in literature and as a mode of 
representation in film and other media. Issues include: gender construction, class formation, racial recognition, 
and national identity-building. Emphasis on comparative method attending American and Chinese cultures and 
the politics of cross-cultural representation. Instructor: Hong. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 279, Visual and Media Studies 223
212S. North Indian Classical Music: Structure, Culture and Lyric. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Linguistics 219S
215S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
417S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 417S, International Comparative Studies 417S, Islamic Studies
216. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Jewish Studies 256; also 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 357, Religion 212, History 294, Islamic Studies
217. Astrology and Religion. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 273
218. The Middle East Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
273; also C-L: Political Science 273, Documentary Studies 274
219. Elements of Linguistic Structure. SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 203
220S. From Al-Qaeda to ISIS: Understanding Terrorism, its Roots, Responses, and 
Ramifications. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Focus on Al-Qaeda as the preeminent terrorist group of contemporary 
militant Islam , its roots, ideology, and offshoots such as ISIS. Examination of Al-Qaeda’s ideology, political 
culture, and development by exploring the origins and the narrative discourse of modern militant Islamic 
organizations dating back to the Salfi Movement of the nineteenth century. Presentation of the patterns and 
ramifications of Al-Qaeda’s terrorist activities. Use critical thinking in order to differentiate Muslim proper 
narrative discourse from that of Al-Qaeda and its affiliated groups. Instructor: Lo. One course. C-L: Islamic 
Studies
221. Arab Society and Culture in Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examination of Arab worldviews (including 
cultural variations, artistic expressions, view about gender, and religion, and perspectives toward the U.S.). 
Explores the development of images of the Arab and seeks to understand them in the context of the Arab world 
as well as in its relationship to the West. Analyzes the dynamics between norms of modern civil society and 
those dictated by religious traditions. Critically examines current Western assumptions, representations and 
understanding of Arab societies, and the moral frameworks in which different choices are debated in the Arab 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 181

context. Instructor: Lo. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 221, Islamic Studies
224S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 219S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 209S, International Comparative Studies 365S, History 225S, Cultural 
Anthropology 224S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219S
225. Islam in the Age of Trump: Race, Immigration, and Empire. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Policy and 
history of treatment of Muslim Americans under Trump administration; Islamophobia as state policy; policy, 
law, history of both African American Muslims and Muslim immigrants; racism, policies of colonialism and 
Empire, and anti-immigrant bigotry. Instructor: Safi. One course. C-L: Religion 225
230S. Islam in the Americas. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 384S; also C-L: History 351S, 
African & African American Studies 274S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 374S, Islamic 
Studies, Human Rights
231. Migrant China. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 241; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies, Marxism and Society
233. Global Chinese Cities through Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ Modern Chinese cities 
in and beyond China, particularly as represented in literature and film. Considers city as object of cultural 
representation, as well as an engine of cultural production. Examines themes of modernization, alienation, 
nostalgia, migration, labor, and commoditization, and rethinks the very notion of “Chineseness” within an 
increasingly globalized world. Featured cities include Beijing, Shanghai, Hong Kong, Taipei, and New York. 
Instructor: Rojas. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 237, International Comparative Studies 302, 
International Comparative Studies
234. Survey of Modern China 1800-Present. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 223
240. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS Examines analog and computer 
games from a cultural perspective. Explores how prevailing culture and values affect game design, popularity, 
and experience. how games affect those areas of culture, such as imagining disaster, utopia and dystopia. 
Explores role-playing and identity, ethics, group behavior, competition, politics, gender, race, and aesthetics. 
Instructor: Ching, Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 242, Literature 249, Visual and 
Media Studies 214, International Comparative Studies 265, Political Science 248
240S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS Examines analog and computer 
games from a cultural perspective. Explores how prevailing culture and values affect game design, popularity, 
and experience. how games affect those areas of culture, such as imagining disaster, utopia and dystopia. 
Explores role-playing and identity, ethics, group behavior, competition, politics, gender, race, and aesthetics. 
Instructor: Ching, Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Literature 249S, Political Science 248S, International 
Comparative Studies 265S, Cultural Anthropology 440S, Visual and Media Studies 214S, Information Science + 
Studies 242S, Information Science + Studies
244. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 148; also C-L: Environment 147, Jewish Studies 148, Public Policy 178, Political Science 159, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 148, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies, Human Rights
246. Dance and Dance Theater of Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 356; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 233, Religion 241, International Comparative Studies 243
247. T’ai Chi and Chinese Thought. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 247; also C-L: Dance 255
252S. Indigenous Journeys in South Asian Film and Literature. ALP, CCI A survey of real or 
imagined journeys in South Asian film and literature from the anxieties of modernity towards traces of the 
indigenous. Combines an interest in travel literature and road movies with inquiry into human values. Examines 
aesthetic representations of journeys that are made to idealize a particular past or to valorize contemporary 
traces of indigenous communities, while exploring the perspectives on modernity afforded by these real or 
imagined journeys. Instructor: Khanna. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 251S, Literature 250S
253S. Epics of India: Ethics, Politics, and Performance Traditions. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Religion 278S
255. Religion and the Novel in Modern India. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 258; also 



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)182

C-L: English 258
257. Four Funerals and a Wedding: Introduction to Chinese Religious Life. CCI, CZ, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Religion 257
262. Contemporary Japanese Visual Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 236
270T-1. Voices in Global Health: Arabic Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Global Health 270T-1
270T-4. Voices in Global Health: Hindi Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Global Health 270T-4; also C-L: 
Hindi 270T-4
270T-5. Voices in Global Health: Mandarin Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Global Health 270T-5
271T. Voices in Philosophy: Chinese Tutorial. Discussion-based course trains students to read and 
analyze core philosophical texts in Chinese, typically in conjunction with a lecture course offered in philosophy. 
Classes include close readings of original texts, discussions of interpretation and application in variety of other 
forms (including film, documentary, multimedia) and real-life situations. Students examine how language/
culture impact our understanding of core philosophical texts through attention to issues such as translation, 
vernacular, and word choice. Tutorials meet weekly for 75 minutes. Recommended prerequisite: Chinese 306 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Chinese 271T
272T. Voices in the Environment: Mandarin. Half course. C-L: see Environment 269T-3
275. Chinese Philosophy. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 263; also C-L: Ethics Elective
281SL. Revolution on Screen: Filming Conflict in the Middle East. ALP, CCI, CZ Explores the 
documentation of conflict in the Middle East through film: the partition of Israel and Palestine in 1948; the wars 
of independence in the 1950s and 1960s; the Iranian Revolution in 1979; the intifadas in Israel and Palestine; 
the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan; the more recent upheavals in Egypt, Tunisia, Libya, Yemen, and Syria; and 
the propagandistic filmmaking of al-Qaeda and ISIS. Looks at documentary film making, motion pictures and 
feature films that interpret conflict through a storytelling lens. Includes a weekly film screening “lab” and a 
discussion section. Instructor: McLarney. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 225SL, International 
Comparative Studies 338SL
283S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents. CCI, CZ Istanbul is the only city in the world located on 
two continents. Istanbul’s Byzantine, Ottoman, and Turkish cultural legacies allow the city to be read as a 
“palimpsest”—an overwritten, layered text of multiple, even contradictory meanings. Istanbul is an ideal site 
to explore imperial history, migration, identity, East/West relations, Islam/Christianity, and cosmopolitanism. 
Through interdisciplinary sources in history, literature, culture and politics, students will examine a variety of 
urban, architectural and social spaces including churches, mosques, public squares and ethnic neighborhoods. 
Taught in English. Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 283S, International Comparative 
Studies 249S, History 397S, Islamic Studies
286. Buddhism and Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 328; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 389
288S. Religion and Politics in Post-Revolutionary Iran. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 
377S; also C-L: Political Science 379S, History 265S
290S. Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture. CCI, CZ The intersection of African, American, 
European, and Islamic cultures studied through the cultural and intellectual flourishing of black Islam. Topics 
include early Muslim communities established in the Americas through the transatlantic slave trade, Muslim 
slave rebellions in Brazil and the Caribbean, Muslim slave autobiographies, African Muslims in Europe, the 
emergence of the Moorish Science Temple and the Nation of Islam, Elijah Muhammad, Malcolm X, Muhammad 
Ali, women of the Nation of Islam, women’s Qur’an exegeses, Hagar as a black woman, black feminism, the 
Five-Percent Nation, Islamic hip-hop and rap, “the Black Crescent,” the black international and Islam, and the 
Black Panthers. Instructor: McLarney. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 295S, Religion 
295S, International Comparative Studies 222S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 296S, Human Rights 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 183

Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 295S, Human Rights
296S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI An introduction 
into Turkish history (including the Ottoman Empire) through a comparative study of the historical novels and 
nonfiction of Nobel Laureate Orhan Pamuk. Addresses Pamuk’s role as an intellectual-author who mediates 
between Islamic culture, secular modernity, the Turkish national tradition and an international canon of 
literature. Political implications of Sufism, cultural revolution, Orientalism, and post-colonialism. Secondary 
focus on representations of cosmopolitan Istanbul, political Islam and the military coup. Taught in English. 
Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: Literature 276S, International Comparative Studies 345S, History 283S, 
Islamic Studies
301D. Religion, Restrictions, and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 301D; also C-L: 
Jewish Studies 301D, Political Science 303D, Public Policy 313D, Study of Ethics 303D
303SA. Women and Gender in the Middle East. CCI, CZ, EI Examination of cultural identity and 
politics in Turkey and modern Middle East. Using Istanbul as a classroom, considers how representations 
of the Middle East are contested and gendered, analyzing such icons as “veiled women” and “terrorist men” 
and political implications of such representations. Topics include emergence of new social movements and 
paradoxes of secularism, Islamism, globalization, and neoliberalism in various settings. Offered only in the Duke 
in Turkey program. Instructor: Göknar, Gökariksel. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 304SA, Political 
Science 213SA
304. Africa and Arabia: Cultures, Communities, and Connections. CCI, CZ, SS This course 
explores communities, cultures, and connections between Africa and Arabia. It provides concepts, information, 
and theories that help students understand cultural relationships between Arabs and Africans, historical 
backgrounds, migration within and emigration from the two groups, and areas of collaboration and contention 
in the globalized world. Selected themes of religion, language, music, and narratives against European 
colonialism will be examined as case studies within overlapping configurations of identity politics. Scholarly 
readings, political biographies, films, guest experts, as well as visiting local religious and diasporic communities 
are vital components of the course. Instructor: Lo. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 306, 
African & African American Studies 306
308S. Bilingualism. CCI, SS Examination of bilingualism at the individual, interpersonal, and social levels 
from psycholinguistic, socio-linguistic, anthropological, and educational perspectives. Issues to include the 
relation between language and cognition, language development, language identity, socio-linguistic practices in 
multicultural settings, language maintenance, and language policy and planning. Instructor: Hae-Young Kim. 
One course. C-L: Linguistics 308S
309. Chinese Im/migration: Chinese Migrant Labor and Immigration to the US. ALP, CCI, EI, 
SS Comparative examination of contemporary China’s “floating population” of migrant labor, and of Chinese 
immigration abroad (particularly to the US). Focus on cultural representation of these phenomena (particularly 
literary, cinematic, and artistic works), but sociological, anthropological, economic, and political perspectives 
will also be considered. Topics include cultural alienation, marginalization, and assimilation; education and 
health care; labor and commodification; gender and ethnicity; narratives of modernization and development; 
together with the ethical, social, and political implications of migration. Instructor: Rojas. One course. C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 309, Human Rights
310S. Acquisition of Japanese as a Second Language. CCI, SS Examining the Japanese language data 
used in the development of second language acquisition theories; learning syntactic and semantic properties of 
the Japanese language and their comparisons with English; reading published empirical studies about acquiring 
Japanese as a second language and evaluate their arguments; designing an original research to address the 
current issues in learning and teaching Japanese. Instructor: Chen. One course. C-L: Linguistics 315S
311S. Poetic Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ Inquiry into sources of “resonance” in international cinema with 
emphasis on films from Asia and the Middle East. The object of the course is to attempt a description of aspects 
of film construction which conduce to intense experience for viewers. Readings in indigenous aesthetics. 
Instructor: Khanna. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 354S, International Comparative Studies 311S
314. Zen Buddhism: A Survey from Its Origins to the Present Day. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Religion 324



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)184

315. Buddhist Meditation in Transformation: Historical, Scientific, and Medical Perspectives. 
CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 323
315S. Buddhist Meditation: Cultivation Practices and Psychology. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Religion 323S
317. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Situates Martin Luther King 
as a preacher in the black Christian tradition with a liberationist reading. Traces the movement from civil rights 
to opposition to economic injustice, war, and militarism. Analyzes what the prophetic voices of today have to say 
about issues of poverty, racism, environmental destruction, militarism, homophobia, drones, sexism. Instructor: 
Safi. One course. C-L: Religion 234, African & African American Studies 249, Public Policy 253, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 249, Human Rights
318S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 
320S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 247S, International Comparative Studies 320S, Latin 
American Studies 320S, Information Science + Studies 323S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 323S
319S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ Intersection of cultures, religions, 
languages, & peoples through history, poetry, music, architecture, & philosophy in Spain. Cultural flourishing 
from the contact—and sometimes clash—of European, Spanish, Islamic, Arab, African, Middle Eastern, and 
Jewish civilizations and Arabic, Spanish, and Hebrew languages. Ends with Andalusian culture in modern 
music, poetry, art, dance, & architecture at the crossroads of civilizations. Includes travel to Spain over spring 
break so students witness firsthand the coexistence of different religious traditions and cultures. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: McLarney/Lieber. One course. C-L: Religion 214S, Jewish Studies 319S, Romance 
Studies 319S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 352S
320S. Refugee Lives: Violence, Culture and Identity. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines how writers, artists 
and filmmakers represent the ways in which Palestinians, Syrians, Iraqis, Sudanese and Egyptians have become 
refugees and their adaptation strategies to new, harsh circumstances both in and outside the Arab world. 
Discusses government and non-governmental organizations that have worked with Arab refugees since 1948. 
Explores the role played by refugees in constructing national identity and consciousness. Instructor: Cooke. One 
course. C-L: Documentary Studies 321S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 321S, Human 
Rights
321. Rumi: Mysticism and Poetry. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Rumi, the iconic poet of Persian Islamic tradition; 
course examines his writings, context, and legacy. Involves students’ research. Encourages students to cultivate 
critical skills by assessing relevant scholarship and developing multidisciplinary methodologies. All readings 
in English; no previous coursework or command of Persian/Arabic required. Instructor: Safi. One course. C-L: 
Religion 381
322. Mystical Literature. ALP, CCI Explore and examine the tradition of mysticism in literature of 
the Arab/Muslim world and among British and American writers. Introduce students to numerous genres 
and literary works that manifest a deep religious attitude or experience as a way of life and cross-cultural 
phenomenon. Focus on selected works from Muslim writers, American & British writers as example of mystics- 
or Sufis outside the traditional Church. Reveal the recurrent theme of direct, intuitional experience of God 
through unifying love. Instructor: Safi. One course. C-L: Religion 263, International Comparative Studies 323, 
Islamic Studies
324S. Muslim Philosophy and Theology, an introduction. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 374S; 
also C-L: Study of Ethics 235S, Islamic Studies
325. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform. CCI, CZ Explores religious revival in the Islamic world: 
revival as reinterpretation of sacred texts, revival as revolution, revival as social movement, revival as spiritual 
awakening, revival as political mobilization. Focuses on Wahabism, Salafism, the renaissance/enlightenment 
of the late 19th century, ijtihad and jihad, grassroots movements, the Muslim Brotherhood, Hassan al-Banna, 
Sayyid Qutb, the awakening (sahwa/yaqza) of the 1970s and 1980s, the Iranian revolution, Khomeini, Ali 
Shariati, feminist theologies in Islam, and the role of the media in circulating religion. Instructor: McLarney. 
One course. C-L: Religion 372, History 444, Islamic Studies
326A. Religion, Security and Global Citizenship in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI Examine how the 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 185

Arab world is embodied in the global or world system of the 21st century. Learn the specific accents that inform 
its citizens and shape its prospects locally, regionally and internationally. Examine how the major Abrahamic 
traditions—Judaism, Christianity and Islam—had their historical origins in the eastern Mediterranean 
world, and how they continue to have adherents that populate the region and challenge the modern notion of 
citizenship. Explore how the current uprising reflects the challenges of reconciling local aspirations with global 
forces. STUDY ABROAD: Duke in the Arab World Summer 2012. One course. C-L: Religion 371A, International 
Comparative Studies 362A, Political Science 395A, Public Policy 339A
328S. Literary Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ The Quran as scripture; mystical poetry; stories of the early 
community; literary cultures in the early community; modern reinterpretations of Islamic sources; Islamist 
literature; modern Islamic poetry, novels, plays, and stories. Instructor: McLarney. One course. C-L: Literature 
328S, Religion 326S
329S. Islamic Media. ALP, CCI, CZ How contemporary technologies reawaken the sense of the sacred in 
daily life, rather than destroy it. How technologies new and old circulate the Word in its multiple incarnations, 
but also cultivate modes of communal identification. How Islamic media transform the social and political 
landscape, as well as the way we see/ feel/ and perceive the world. How religion has been intensified, diversified, 
and inflected by the information age. How this media constitutes the very experience of religion. Film, video, 
digital media, satellite television, social media, print media, audiocassettes, radio, music. Instructor: McLarney. 
One course. C-L: Religion 379S, International Comparative Studies 331S, Visual and Media Studies 342S
330S. Middle East Women Writers. ALP, CCI, CZ The emergence of women writers in the Middle East 
from nineteenth-century poets to twenty-first-century bloggers. Novels, short stories, autobiographies and 
poetry dealing with Arab, Turkish, Persian and Israeli women’s experiences as well as rights in the home and in 
politics, war, colonialism, religion and sexuality. Writers include Syrian Samman, Idilbi; Egyptian Sha’arawi, El 
Saadawi, Lebanese al-Shaykh, Barakat; Palestinian Khalifa, Tuqan; Iraqi al-Malaika and Riverbend; Algerian 
Djebar; Turkish Aliye and Edip; Persian Ebadi, Farokhzad and Satrapi; Israeli Ravikowich and Castel Bloom. 
Instructor: Havligolu. One course. C-L: Islamic Studies
331S. Buddhist Ethics. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Religion 321S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 321S, 
Ethics Elective, Marine Science and Conservation
335. Chinatowns: A Cultural History. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Explores the intersection of space and ethnicity 
through the myriad ways Chinatown has circulated as memory, fantasy, narrative, myth, in the dominant 
cultural imagination, and how lived realities of overseas Chinese communities, Asian American history, and 
changing conceptions of “Chineseness” have productively engaged with real and phantom Chinatowns. Research 
will emphasize multi-disciplinary approaches, such as urban history, architecture, ethnography, economics; or 
engagement in a creative project. Instructor: Chow. One course. C-L: History 228, International Comparative 
Studies 336
338S. Globalization and Theater. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 338S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 357S
339S. Local Islams: Islamic Communities in the Area. CCI, CZ, EI, SS A hands-on introduction to 
the Sufi, Salafi, Sunni, Shia, and Nation of Islam Muslims in the area and to the diverse locales, ethnicities, 
and practices of the Muslim community at large. A scholarly examination of Islam in America, African 
American Islam, mosque and school, interfaith and pluralism, and Islamic feminism. Includes field trips and 
group projects in the local community, films and literature about American Islam. Students will forge local 
relationships that will deepen and enrich your intellectual understanding of Islam, Muslims, and America. 
Instructor: McLarney. One course. C-L: Religion 386S
341S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Probes 
representations of the Jewish Holocaust in World Cinema. Explores divergent filmic strategies employed to 
represent what is commonly deemed as “beyond representation”. Focuses on theoretical and philosophical 
questions that pertains to the representation of horror in general and of the genocide of Jews in particular. Asks 
whether anything is permissible in representing such an event: Is there an appropriate way, in contradistinction 
to inappropriate way, to represent the Jewish Holocaust? Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 275S, Jewish Studies 266S, Literature 263S, Documentary Studies
349S. Hinduism and Judaism: Culture, Religion, and Identity. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)186

216S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 215S
351S. Atheism and Buddhism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 330S
352. Modern Hindi Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ A survey of Hindi literature from the early twentieth century 
to the present focusing on the power of literary forms to induce aesthetic experience and express cultural 
endeavors. Poetry, plays, short stories, novels. Instructor: Khanna. One course.
357. Modern & Global India. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 218; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 218
359. Violent Jihad in the Twentieth Century - A Global History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
359; also C-L: Political Science 382, Public Policy 359, International Comparative Studies 361
360. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Cultural Anthropology 360; also C-L: Literature 361, Sociology 360, International Comparative Studies 369
360S. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Cultural Anthropology 360S; also C-L: Literature 361S, Public Policy 358S, Sociology 360S, International 
Comparative Studies 369S
372. Two Koreas: History, Society and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ Introduces the divided histories of North 
and South Korea and their contemporary legacies in regional and global contexts. Explores topics such as 
colonization, modernization, division, war, migration, gender and sexuality, human rights, popular and political 
cultures, and globalization in comparative perspectives. Examines historical narratives, journalism, museums, 
literature, and visual cultures. Instructor: Kwon. One course. C-L: History 473, Cultural Anthropology 473
373S. Islamic Mysticism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 373S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 380S, Study of Ethics 373S, History 380S, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies
375S. Middle East and Latin America. CCI, CZ How Middle Eastern identities blend with Latin American 
ones, through migration, institutions, popular media, transnational political ideologies (Marxist, leftist, socialist, 
populist, nationalist, religious, or feminist), as well as through conversions and proselytizing. Solidarities across 
the Global South central to Latin American projects to “decolonize the mind,” to mutually inspired “liberation 
theologies,”, and to new kinds of non-Western feminisms. This course explores the creative conjuncture of 
Middle Eastern and Latin American politics and cultures, through immigration and assimilation, institution 
building, political activism, media production, feminism, and conversion. Instructor: McLarney. One course. 
C-L: Latin American Studies 330S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
379SA. Gender and Immigration between Europe and the Middle East. ALP, CCI Investigates 
the gendered experience of immigration and its implications for changing the culture both at home and in 
the hosting countries. Between the traditions of the country of origin and acculturation to the new home, 
women and LGBTQ communities are the most vulnerable facing gender-based discrimination and violence. 
Nonetheless, immigration also offers the opportunity to cross the borders of binaries, such as femininity and 
masculinity, which can be empowering and liberating. This seminar is offered as part of the Middle East in 
Europe: Berlin/Istanbul study abroad program. Instructor: Havlioglu. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 269SA
380SA. Transnational Muslims in Germany: Politics of Migration, Religion, and Culture. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS Critically analyzes political debates about Muslims and Islam in Europe that often cast them as a 
“security threat” or a “problem” of failed integration. Traces the geographical production of Muslim subjects 
through transnational flows, networks and imaginaries. Examines a series of topics including debates about the 
headscarf, Muslim women’s dress, mosque construction, Muslim civil society organizations, and the refugee 
crisis in Germany. Taught in English as part of the Duke Middle East in Europe program. Instructor: Gökariksel. 
One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 323SA, International Comparative Studies 278SA, 
Cultural Anthropology 382SA, Religion 382SA
381SA. Politics and Culture Between Europe and the Middle East. CCI, CZ Surveys the changing 
geopolitical context of communities between Europe and the Middle East through an interdisciplinary cultural 
framework from WWI to the present. Emphasis on German/Turkish relations. Analysis of representations 
of nationalism, identity, ethnicity, gender and religion. Examines intersections of modernity, revolution, and 
lived and political Islam to analyze the ways in which political ideologies create and question Middle Eastern 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 187

identities. Secondary theoretical readings, including work by political scientists, cultural critics, and policy 
experts. Taught in English as part of the Duke Middle East in Europe program. Instructor: Göknar. One course. 
C-L: Public Policy 386SA, History 378SA, International Comparative Studies 225SA
383S. Istanbul and Berlin. CCI, EI, SS Examines the cultural and political history of Istanbul and Berlin 
from the late 19th. c. to the present. Beginning with the late Ottoman context and German national unification, 
focus on Ottoman-German relations through WWI, Turks in Germany since the 1960s, and Turkish-EU relations 
in historiography, travelogues, literature and film. Secondary readings in cosmopolitanism, identity, subjectivity, 
and Islam in Europe. Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: German 283S, International Comparative Studies 
356S, History 368S
386S. Tibetan Buddhism: Culture, Ethics, Philosophy and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: 
see Religion 327S
389A. Between Europe and Asia: The Geopolitics of Istanbul From Occupation To Globalization. 
CCI, CZ, EI Istanbul as a site of historical, political and cultural interaction between Europe and Turkey. 
Approach framed by two important geopolitical events separated by nearly a century: first, the Allied occupation 
of Istanbul after WWI, which gave rise to the modern Middle East, and second, Turkey’s accession to the 
European Union, a contested transnational process that officially began in 2005. Examination of issues arising 
from Turkey’s separation from Europe as a Muslim country and its potential reintegration as a functioning 
democracy. Offered only in the Duke-in-Turkey study abroad program. Instructor: Goknar. One course. C-L: 
Slavic and Eurasian Studies 342A
390. Special Topics. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern 
Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics. Seminar version of Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 390. Topics vary each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern 
Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
402. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302; also 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320, Visual and Media Studies 324, Information Science + Studies 
302
402S. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302S; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320S, Visual and Media Studies 349S, Information Science + 
Studies 302S
409S. Discourse of Disease and Infection. ALP, CCI, CZ, STS Modern discourses of disease and 
infection. The transmutation of medical theory into a metaphorical discourse of social structure and individual 
identity. Cultural representations of modern epidemics, including AIDS and SARS. Instructor: Rojas. One 
course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 404S, Visual and Media Studies 238S
410S. Trauma and Space in Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ Space and Trauma across Asia. Introduces theoretical 
framework of “trauma discourse;” examines how the experience of space in Asia broadly defined has shaped 
historical traumas, which have marked the transition from colonialism to postcolonialism. Focus on Israel/
Palestine, India/Pakistan, China/Taiwan, Japan/Korea; examine how critical terms originating in one historico-
geographical context are translated across geographical boundaries. Instructor: Kwon, Ginsburg. One course. 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 366S, International Comparative Studies 410S
413S. Vampire Chronicles: Fantasies of Vampirism in a Cross-Cultural Perspective. ALP, 
CCI Literary and cinematic representations of vampirism, from Dracula to Buffy, Chinese jiangshi to the politics 
of blood-selling and blood donation. The figure of the vampire as embodiment of anxieties about sexuality, 
desire, gender identity, and ethnic alterity. Cross-cultural circulation of vampiric traditions, vampirism as a 
symbol of circulation in its own right. Instructor: Rojas. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)188

406S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 231S, Study of Sexualities 231S, International Comparative 
Studies
415S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Critical examination 
of cultural dynamics, political economies, and ethical implications of interethnic intimacies or “intercourse” 
as represented from and about Asia. Examines shifts within and beyond “Asia,” asking why cultural 
representations matter in ways societies construct, produce, and consume objects of desire and repulsion. 
Texts from literature and visual culture read along with theories of critical race studies, gender and sexuality, 
postcolonialism, globalization, visual culture, and other representative technologies of the Self/Other. Not open 
to students who have taken the first-year seminar. Instructor: Kwon. One course. C-L: Literature 415S, Cultural 
Anthropology 415S, Visual and Media Studies 416S, International Comparative Studies 415S, Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 415S
420S. Civil Society and Civic Engagement in the Arab World: Theories and Practices. CCI, CZ, 
EI, SS, W Introduces students to realities of civil society and the mechanism of civic engagement in the 
Middle East and North Africa; explores assumptions on the role of civic engagement in promoting democracy; 
examines theoretical questions related to applying Western concepts of civic society in mostly majority Muslim 
countries. Students study modalities of society as well as Arab and Muslim writers conception of an ideal society 
and analyze civic engagement-oriented entities in the US in order to write and experiment with opportunities 
and challenges of furthering civic engagement in MENA. Students develop or evaluate a MENA related NGO. 
Service-learning requires 20 hours minimum outside of class. Instructor: Lo. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 233S
425S. Cultures of New Media. ALP, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 434S; also C-L: 
Literature 412S, Visual and Media Studies 412S, International Comparative Studies 432S
426S. France-Asia: Cultural Transfers and Translations in a Globalized Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
FL, W One course. C-L: see French 426S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 413S, Literature 426S
432S. Storyworlds: The Art, Technology, and Pleasure of Narrative. ALP, CCI, CZ Is “tell me 
a story” an universal imperative? Seminar examines storytelling practices across a broad span of histories 
and cultures, and the creation of storyworlds through multiple media, genres, and platforms. Topics include 
comparative oral traditions, Medieval story cycles, serial tales, textual poaching and fanfic, alternate reality 
gameworlds (ARG), social media, transmedia storytelling and transcultural fandoms. Instructor: Chow. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 384S, International Comparative Studies 333S
433S. Serial Fictions: The Art of ‘To Be Continued’. ALP, CCI A survey of the forms that seriality has 
taken: from Arabian Nights and Journey to the West, to Victorian serialists like Dickens and Conan Doyle, to 
daily ‘funnies’ and comics, anime and manga, contemporary genre fiction and endless movie sequels. Course 
will focus on diverse media (oral traditions, modern novels, cinema, soap operas, graphic novels, fanfiction, 
transmedial narratives, social media) that use the serial form as audience lure and aesthetic device. Instructor: 
Chow. One course.
435S. Chinese Media and Popular Culture: Politics, Ideology, and Social Change. CCI, 
SS Examines contemporary Chinese media traditional news press, radio and TV, new media such as the internet 
and social media, and popular culture, including cinema, popular music and fashions. Uses cross-cultural, 
interdisciplinary, and comparative approach. Focuses on how China views itself and constructs its global images, 
and how the world views China through media and popular culture. Primary objective is to understand political, 
ideological, and social changes since the Reform Era that began in 1978. No foreign language prerequisites are 
required. Instructor: Liu. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 435S, Political Science 435S, Policy 
Journalism and Media, International Comparative Studies
436. Graphic Asia: Visual Storytelling and Global Asian/American Networks. ALP, CCI Introduces 
graphic visual theories and practices and explores the graphic novel form. Surveys earlier word-image texts; 
mainstream, alternative, and web-based comics; Asian traditions of manga, manhwa, manhua. Examines role 
of the graphic artist in the changing epistemologies, histories, and formations of Global Asian/Pacific/American 
networks. Instructor: Chow. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 239, International Comparative Studies 
264
437S. Capstone Seminar - Globalization: Asia and Asian America. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 189

C-L: see History 454S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 407S, International Comparative Studies 
412S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 412S
438S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Course examines global Science Fiction genres in literature, film, and social media as case studies to 
understand broad historical and social formations of Otherness, the Alien, Citizenship, (Im)migration. Studies 
racial assumptions in popular culture, domestic and international law, discourse of the human and human 
rights, science and technology industries, and other disciplines. Explores interdisciplinary intersections of race, 
gender, sexuality, class, and geopolitical divisions and interactions in Asian/American Studies and Postcolonial 
Studies from the past to the present. Instructor: Kwon. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 438S, 
International Comparative Studies 407S, Study of Sexualities 438S, Visual and Media Studies 438S, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 438S, Literature 438S, International Comparative Studies
439. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines queer discourses, cultures, and social formations in China, 
Greater China, and the global Chinese diaspora from the late imperial period to the present. Course will 
focus on cultural representations, particularly literary and cinematic, but will also consider a wide array of 
historical, anthropological, sociological, and theoretical materials. Instructor: Rojas. One course. C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 439, Literature 439, Visual and Media Studies 439, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 439
451S. Death and the Emergence of the Modern Self. ALP, CCI, EI, SS Comparative examination 
of how “death” informs the modern self. Looks at the tension between the religious death and secular death. 
Probes the role played by the Jewish experience of the 20th century in shaping post WWII self. Comparison 
with notions of death and the self in the Middle East and East Asia. Focuses on cultural representations of death 
(particularly literary, cinematic and artistic), but sociological, anthropological and political perspectives will also 
be considered. Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 340S
455S. World of Gaming: Art, Theory, Technology, and Business of a Multi-Billion Dollar Global 
Industry. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS Interdisciplinary and transnational exploration into the multi-billion dollar 
global gaming industry through social and theoretical lens. Asks what are the possibilities and pitfalls of 
gaming in our societies? Examines local and global cases, through art, storytelling, theory, design, technology, 
business, and gamer and fan communities. Select social and theoretical issues explored include im/migration 
and refugees, identity (race, gender, class and sexuality), environment, education, civic engagement, sports, 
recreation, war, and technology. Asia is one important case study as one of the most vibrant regions for 
examining gaming cultures, conflicts, and theories. Instructor: Kwon. One course. C-L: Art History 453S, Visual 
and Media Studies 455S, Literature 455S
456S. Chinese Culture and Ideology in the 20th Century and Now. ALP, CCI, SS Exposes students to 
cultural and literary expressions and representations of modern China from the beginning of the 20th century to 
the present; focus on issues of politics and ideology and the formation of Chinese exceptionalism; the beginning 
of the 20th century (1900-1949) and the Mao era (1949-1976); contemporary China since the era of reform 
and opening up (1978-present); comparative, interdisciplinary approaches of intellectual and cultural history, 
literary and cultural studies, and political science. Instructor: Liu. One course. C-L: Political Science 456S
463S. Nightmare Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Inquiry into social anxieties erupted through encounters 
with natural or man-made ‘disasters.’ Examine defining disasters of modern Japan—the encounter with 
the West, the imperialist war and subsequent defeat, nuclear bomb and the recent Fukushima meltdowns, 
earthquakes and tsunami, recession and its associated social malady. Reading through literature, films and 
popular culture as sites where fantasy and desire are materialized and projected in coping with these ineluctable 
catastrophes. Instructor: Ching. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 463S
469S. Minor Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examine the history and experiences of marginalized peoples in 
Japan from the Ainu to ethnic Koreans, from queer to the Okinawans, to challenge the myth of racial and ethnic 
homogeneity and sexual heteronormativity. Enhance understanding about cultural and artistic productions by 
reading a variety of texts, including fiction, oral histories, philosophical treatises, and films. Instructor: Ching. 
One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 364S
476S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics and Poetics of Knowledge Production. CCI, CZ, 
R Engages students in the practices and theories of archiving, documenting and curating marginal histories. 
Hands-on research in the archives of Duke’s Rubenstein Special Collections and elsewhere. Examines 
histories of movements and encounters between the “West” and “Asia.” Teaches original archival research and 



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)190

documentary methods through guided excavations in digital, audiovisual, and material resources. Directed 
readings and special guest lectures guide students on how to think critically on the theories and praxis of 
knowledge production, collection, documentation, circulation, and consumption. Students curate projects 
for final research assignment. Instructor: Kwon. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 411S, 
Literature 476S, Visual and Media Studies 476S, History 448S, Documentary Studies 476S
477S. The Global Arab World. CCI, CZ, SS This seminar will focus on contemporary works, 
anthropological and historical, that unearth veins of research on the Arab world whose horizons transcend the 
earlier theoretical metonyms, as well as the frontiers of nation-states and the boundaries of religious traditions. 
We will read works which explore lives, ideas, practices, and institutions in the Arab world through situating 
them within global processes. In thinking about the Arab world in a transnational perspective we seek to 
look into how this area of the world both shaped other societies, and was shaped by, this global circulation of 
humans, commodities, technologies, ideologies, news and thought. Instructor: Bardawil. One course.
478S. Korean Sociolinguistics. CCI, CZ, SS Examination of Korean language in social and cultural 
contexts from sociolinguistic and linguistic anthropological points of view. Focus on construction of cultural 
identities, social order and interpersonal relationships through everyday language use. Honorifics and language 
ideology, language and gender, regional and social variations, language contact and language policy in 
contemporary Korea. Sociolinguistics literature introducing conceptual frameworks and empirical research on 
specifics of language in use and synchronic and diachronic variations. Readings and class conducted in English. 
Prerequisite: Familiarity with Korean or basics of Linguistics. Instructor: Hae-Young Kim. One course. C-L: 
Linguistics 306S
479S. Critical Interventions in Middle East Studies and Policy. CCI, CZ, SS Surveys foundational 
and contemporary scholarship in Middle East Studies through area studies, cultural studies, history and 
policy lenses. Students examine both the development of the field, as well as its critical themes, questions 
and concepts. Comparative analysis of key texts, paradigmatic theories, and a variety of cultural and political 
sources. Concepts include secular modernity, Orientalism, gender, historiography, identity, postcolonialism, 
religious practice and Middle East policy. Intersection with regional historical and geopolitical developments. 
Develops skills in academic analysis and interpretation. Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: Public Policy 417S, 
History 417S, International Comparative Studies 408S, Literature 417S, International Comparative Studies
489S. The History, Theory, and Praxis of Translating Languages and Worlds. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Examines histories, theories, and praxes of translation, with attention to both the formal elements of 
translating languages, as well as the larger cultural and social processes involved. Topics include cultural 
exchange, imperialism, “Global Englishes,” incommensurability, bilingualism, indigeneity and adaptation, 
changing technological platforms and machine translation. Prerequisite: all participants must have strong 
command of one language aside from English, as final project involves original translation and commentary. 
Instructor: Chow, Rojas. One course. C-L: Literature 384S, Linguistics 384S
490S. Special Topics. Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern Studies vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual Research in a field of special interest under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494A. Research Independent Study on Contemporary China. FL, R Research and field studies 
culminating in a paper approved and supervised by the resident director. Includes field trips on cultural and 
societal changes in contemporary China. Offered at the Duke in China Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Collaborative Research Projects. R Small collaborative research projects of faculty with graduate 
and undergraduate students. Close mentoring of students. Training in methods of cultural analysis and 
interpretation. Projects developed in conjunction with ongoing faculty initiatives. Students will present their 
research in the form of a term paper or some equivalent medium. Funding available to support students’ 
research. Consent of Director of Undergraduate Studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
498S. Senior Honors Thesis Seminar. R, W Required for AMES seniors completing an honors thesis. 
Includes close work with thesis advisers. The fundamentals of writing a research project. Students will share 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 191

and critically evaluate portions of each other’s projects. Consent of department required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
499S. Senior Honors Thesis Seminar. R, W Required for AMES seniors completing an honors thesis. 
Course will guide students through the writing of the thesis, the preliminary research for which will have been 
completed in the Fall. Students will share and critically evaluate portions of each other’s projects. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
502S. Translation Studies and Workshop. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 530S; 
also C-L: Romance Studies 520S
503. Asian & Middle Eastern Studies. Graduate credit for undergraduate course in AMES. Consent of the 
instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
503S. Asian & Middle Eastern Studies. Graduate credit for undergraduate course in AMES. Consent of the 
instructor and the AMES DGS required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
504S. East Asia’s Twentieth Century. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 504S
505S. Seminar in Asian and Middle Eastern Cultural Studies. CZ Concentration on a theoretical 
problem or set of issues germane to the study of Asian and Middle Eastern cultures. One course. C-L: African & 
African American Studies 540S, Literature 530S
511. Documentary and East Asian Cultures. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Focus on documentary films from 
various regions in East Asia, including China, Taiwan, Korea and Japan, studying the specific historical and 
social context of each while attending to their interconnected histories and cultures. Emphasis on the ethical 
implications of documentary in terms of its deployment of visual-audio apparatus to represent different groups 
of people and beliefs, values and conflicts, both intra- and inter-regionally in East Asia. Special attention paid to 
the aesthetics and politics of the documentary form in terms of both its production of meanings and contexts of 
reception. Instructor: Hong. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 511, International Comparative Studies 513
515S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Critical examination 
of cultural dynamics, political economies, and ethical implications of interethnic intimacies or “intercourse” 
as represented from and about Asia. Examines shifts within and beyond “Asia”, asking why cultural 
representations matter in ways societies construct, produce, and consume objects of desire and repulsion. 
Texts from literature and visual culture read along with theories of critical race studies, gender and sexuality, 
postcolonialism, globalization, visual culture, and other representative technologies of the Self/Other. May be 
taught simultaneously with AMES 415S with additional requirements. Students who have taken the first-year 
seminar are not eligible. Instructor: Kwon. One course. C-L: Literature 515S, Visual and Media Studies 515S, 
International Comparative Studies 515S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 505S
518S. Approaches and Practices in Second Language Pedagogy. CCI Introduction to the history and 
current trends in language teaching with the goal of acquiring the knowledge and skills for informed, effective 
and reflective language instruction. Focus on psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic dimensions of second 
language acquisition, key concepts of second language teaching and their applications, and integration of culture 
and literature in language instruction. Compares features of the target and source languages. Assignments 
include review of teaching materials, creating lesson plans and modules, and writing an essay stating teaching 
philosophies. Open only to students who have a background in Asian languages. Instructor: Kim. One course. 
C-L: Linguistics 518S, Education 518S
519S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ Intersection of cultures, religions, 
languages, and peoples through history, architecture, poetry, music, philosophy, and everyday life of southern 
Spain. Cultural flourishing from the contact—and sometimes clash—of European, Spanish, Islamic, Arab, 
African, Middle Eastern, and Jewish civilizations and of the Arabic, Spanish, and Hebrew languages. Overlaps 
in mystical conceptions of the divine, in philosophical ideas about rational knowledge, in poetic, musical, and 
literary forms, in architectural styles, and in shared histories. Ends with how Andalusian culture continues to 
thrive in modern consciousness (in music, poetry, art, dance, architecture, etc.) at the crossroads of civilizations. 
Instructor: McLarney/Lieber. One course. C-L: Religion 519S, Jewish Studies 519S, Romance Studies 519S
526A. Religion and Civil Society in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI Examine how the Arab world is 
embodied in world system of the 21st century. Learn the specific accents that inform its citizens and shape 



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)192

its prospects locally, regionally and internationally. Examine how the major Abrahamic traditions—Judaism, 
Christianity and Islam—had their historical origins in the eastern Mediterranean world, and how they continue 
to have adherents that populate the region and challenge the modern notion of citizenship. Explore how the 
current uprising reflects the challenges of reconciling local aspirations with global forces.Class content is similar 
to AMES 326A with added reading materials, meeting hours and assignments. STUDY ABROAD: Duke in the 
Arab World. Instructor: Lo & McLarney. One course. C-L: Religion 526A
527S. Cartographies of Gender and Sexuality in Middle East. R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 503S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 503S
528S. Literary Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ The Quran as scripture; mystical poetry; stories of the early 
community; literary cultures in the early community; modern reinterpretations of Islamic sources; Islamist 
literature; modern Islamic poetry, novels, plays, and stories. (Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 328S, 
but with additional readings, assignments, and meeting times). Instructor: McLarney. One course.
529S. Gender Jihad: Muslim Women Writers. ALP, CCI Roles and representations of women in 
Muslim societies of Asia (including Indonesia, South Asia, and the Middle East) and Africa, as well as in Muslim 
minority societies (including Europe and the United States). Examination of ways writers and filmmakers 
project images of women in today’s Muslim societies. Focus on women as producers of culture and as social 
critics. Same as AMES 173S but requires extra assignments. Instructor: McLarney. One course.
531S. Culture and Environment in Modern Chinese History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see History 514S
532S. Research and Writing About Contemporary Chinese Culture. CCI, R, SS Addresses how 
to conduct research and write about contemporary Chinese culture from interdisciplinary and comparative 
perspectives; introduces critical theory and comparative and interdisciplinary approaches. Engages students in 
current debates about the rise of China and its implications for social and human values and cultures. Taught in 
English. Prerequisite: advanced knowledge of Chinese. Original research projects to explore with primary and 
secondary materials. Instructor: Liu. One course.
533. Traffic in Women: Cultural Perspectives on Prostitution in Modern China. ALP, CCI, 
SS Dialectic of prostitution as lived experience, and as socio-cultural metaphor. Focus on literary and 
cinematic texts, together with relevant theoretical works. The figure of the prostitute will be used to interrogate 
assumptions about gender identity, commodity value, and national discourse. Transnational traffic in women 
will provide context for examination of discourses of national identity in China and beyond, together with 
the fissures at the heart of those same discourses. Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 333 but with 
additional graduate level work. Instructor: Rojas. One course.
535. Chinese Media and Pop Culture. ALP, CCI, R Current issues of contemporary Chinese media and 
popular culture within the context of globalization. Cultural politics, ideological discourse, and intellectual 
debates since gaige kaifang (reform and opening up); aspects of Chinese media and popular culture: cinema, 
television, newspapers and magazines, the Internet, popular music, comics, cell phone text messages, and 
fashion. Instructor: Liu. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 535, Policy Journalism and Media
539S. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines queer discourses, cultures, and social formations in China, 
Greater China, and the global Chinese diaspora from the late imperial period to the present. Course will focus 
on cultural representations, particularly literary and cinematic, but will also consider a wide array of historical, 
anthropological, sociological, and theoretical materials. Not open to students who have taken Asian and Middle 
Eastern Studies 439. Instructor: Rojas. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 539S, Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 502S, Literature 539S, Visual and Media Studies 539S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 539S, Human Rights
540S. Reading Heidegger. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Closely reading major works by Heidegger Tracing the Turn 
in Heidegger’s thought from the early metaphysical writing to the lecture courses of the 1930s. Underscores the 
role played by language in Heidegger’s thought Probes what aesthetics means within the context of Heidegger’s 
work. Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Literature 543S, Religion 560S
541S. Jews and the End of Theory. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Examines role played by the figure of “the Jew” (or 
“Jews”) in critical theory. Assesses role played by Jewish “giants” in shaping critical theory. Explores role played 
by images of Jews and Jewishness in linguistic turn of 20th century theory. Asks how should one understand 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 193

contemporary theory in relation to “Jews”—literal Jews and figurative Jews, whether demise of these intellectual 
giants and diminishing interest in “Jews” and “Jewishness” means “the end of theory”, and how to conceive the 
relations between theory and “Jewish Studies” in light of these questions. Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: 
Jewish Studies 541S, Literature 580S, International Comparative Studies 541S
549S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and SF. ALP, CCI, CZ Course examines 
global Science Fiction genres in literature, film, and social media to understand broad historical and social 
formations of Otherness, the Alien, Citizenship, (Im)migration. Studies racial assumptions in popular culture, 
domestic and international law, discourse of the human and human rights, science and technology industries, 
and other disciplines. Explores intersections of race, gender, sexuality, class, and geopolitical divisions and 
interactions in Asian/American Studies and Postcolonial Studies from the past to the present. Instructor: Kwon. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 549S
551S. Translation: Theory/Praxis. ALP, CCI Examines theories and practices of translation from 
various periods and traditions (Cicero, Zhi Qian, classical and scriptural translators, Dryden, Schopenhauer, 
Benjamin, Jakobson, Tanizaki, Qian Zhongshu, Derrida, Apter, among others) and considers topics such as 
incommensurability, cultural exchange, imperialism, “Global Englishes,” bilingualism, and techno-language. 
Prerequisite: open to undergraduates, but all participants must have strong command of one language aside 
from English, as final project involves original translation and commentary. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Chow. One course. C-L: Literature 551S
560S. Reading the Chinese Novel. ALP, FL A close reading of contemporary Chinese-language novels in 
the original. Texts will include prominent works from China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, and the Chinese diaspora. 
Recommended prerequisite: high-level reading knowledge of Chinese. Instructor: Rojas, Chow. One course.
561. Anime: Origins, Forms, Mutations. ALP, CCI Historical origins of Japanese anime, as well as its 
status as art, narrative, genre. Ways in which anime mutates: formally (literature, manga, live action), culturally 
(fashion, otaku, fan communities), geographically. No prior knowledge of subject matter or Japanese language 
required. Not open to students who have taken AMES 361 Anime: Forms and Mutations. Instructor: Chow. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 541
563S. Nightmare Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Inquiry into social anxieties erupted through encounters with 
natural or man-made ‘disasters.’ Examine defining disasters of modern Japan—the encounter with the West, 
the imperialist war and subsequent defeat, nuclear bomb and the recent Fukushima meltdowns, earthquakes 
and tsunami, recession and its associated social malady. Reading through literature, films and popular culture 
as sites where fantasy and desire are materialized and projected in coping with these ineluctable catastrophes. 
Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 463S but with additional readings, assignments and meeting times. 
Instructor: Ching. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 563S
565S. The World of Japanese Pop Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, R An examination of modern Japanese 
culture through a variety of media including literary texts, cultural representations, and films. Different material 
each year; may be repeated for credit. (Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 165S but requires extra 
assignments.) Instructor: Ching. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 565S, International Comparative 
Studies
566S. Imaging a Nation: Japanese Visual Culture 1868-1945. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Visual and Media Studies 523S
576S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics of Poetics of Knowledge Production. R Engages 
students in the practices, politics, and theories of conducting original archival research and knowledge 
productions. Hands-on research in the archives of Duke’s Rubenstein Special Collections and elsewhere. 
Examines histories and theories of movements and encounters between the “West” and “Asia.” Teaches research 
methods through guided excavations in both digital and material resources. Directed readings of histories 
and theories and special guest lectures guide students on how to think critically on the theories and praxis of 
knowledge production, collection, circulation, and consumption. Students curate digital humanities projects 
based on original research. Instructor: Kwon. One course.
580S. History of Buddhist and Christian Interactions. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 580S
581S. Pan-Asianism, Religion, and the State in Modern Asia. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Religion 581S



 Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES)194

590. Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
593. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
603. The Palestinian-Israeli Conflict in Literature and Film. A cultural study of the collapse of the 
Israeli-Palestinian peace process and failure of Israeli and Palestinian doves to transform their respective 
communities and to change conditions on the ground. Focus on self-criticism as manifested in Israeli and 
Palestinian literature and cinema and on its limits. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 683, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 603, Human Rights
605. East Asian Cultural Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R East Asia as a historical and geographical category of 
knowledge emerging within the various processes of global movements (imperialism, colonialism, economic 
regionalism). Instructor: Ching. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 605, Literature 571, International 
Comparative Studies 605
610S. Trauma and Space in Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ Space and Trauma across Asia. Introduces theoretical 
framework of “trauma discourse;” examines how the experience of space in Asia broadly defined has shaped 
historical traumas, which have marked the transition from colonialism to postcolonialism. Focus on Israel/
Palestine, India/Pakistan, China/Taiwan, Japan/Korea; examines how critical terms originating in one 
historico-geographical context are translated across geographical boundaries. Taught simultaneously with 
AMES 410, but includes additional readings, assignments, and meeting times. Instructor: Kwon, Ginsburg. One 
course.
611. Melodrama East and West. Melodrama as a genre in literature and as a mode of representation in film 
and other media. Issues include: gender construction, class formation, racial recognition, and national identity-
building. Emphasis on comparative method attending American and Chinese cultures and the politics of 
cross-cultural representation. (Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 411 but requires extra assignments.) 
Instructor: Hong. One course.
620S. Critical Genealogies of the Middle East: An examination of the canon of Middle East 
scholarship. CCI, CZ, SS This course provides an in-depth investigation into the various theoretical and 
textual traditions that inform interdisciplinary Middle East studies with a focus on History, Cultural Studies, 
Religion and Social Sciences. Interdisciplinary in scope, the course will maintain a disciplinary rigor so that 
students learn how knowledge is produced within the framework of specific disciplines. Foci include social 
history, literary theory, critical visual studies, and postcolonial theory. Staff: cooke. One course.
625. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform. Explores religious revival in the Islamic world: revival as 
reinterpretation of sacred texts, revival as revolution, revival as social movement, revival as spiritual awakening, 
revival as political mobilization, revival as cultural renaissance. Graduate students will pursue in depth research 
in their specific area of concentration, read selected sources in the original languages, and design a final project 
that furthers their course of study. Instructor: McLarney. One course. C-L: Islamic Studies
629. Revolution: The Arab World. ALP, CCI, CZ Revolution in the Middle East and the Arab world; focus 
on Tunis, Syria, and Egypt: revolution in theory and practice; histories of revolution in the region; religion and 
revolution; media, social media, and social change; the poetics of politics; women’s political action. Graduate 
level includes readings and research in Arabic, or any other primary source readings in original language of 
graduate students’ area of specialty; more extensive theoretical readings; a substantive research paper; regular 
group meetings with instructors to discuss extra readings. Instructor: McLarney. One course.
631. Questions of National Cinemas. CZ, R Films, documentaries, television series, and soap operas 
produced in mainland China in the post-Mao era. Topics include the history and aesthetics of the cinema, 
soap operas as the new forum for public debates on popular culture, the emerging film criticism in China, 
the relationship of politics and form in postrevolutionary aesthetics. (Same as AMES 431 but requires extra 
assignments.) Research paper required. Instructor: Hong. One course. C-L: Literature 632, Visual and Media 
Studies 632, International Comparative Studies
631S. Seminar on Modern Chinese Cinema. CZ, R Films, documentaries, television series, and soap 



Asian & Middle Eastern Studies (AMES) 195

operas produced in mainland China in the post-Mao era. Topics include the history and aesthetics of the cinema, 
soap operas as the new forum for public debates on popular culture, the emerging film criticism in China, 
the relationship of politics and form in postrevolutionary aesthetics. (Same as AMES 431 but requires extra 
assignments.) Research paper required. Instructor: Hong. One course. C-L: Literature 631S, Visual and Media 
Studies 631S, International Comparative Studies
650S. Human Rights in Islam. CCI, CZ, EI Islamic conceptions of human rights, beginning with early 
formulations of key concepts like freedom and equality during the Arab “awakening” or Nahda and continuing 
to Islamic conceptions of rights after WWII and the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Special attention 
to how women’s rights and women’s emancipation became key points of dispute between the West and the 
Islamic world. How ideas of the human and humanity (and its “rights”) are constructed, especially within the 
humanities. Same as 450S, but with graduate level assignments and discussions. Instructor: McLarney. One 
course. C-L: Religion 661S
661. Japanese Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ An introduction to the history of Japanese cinema focusing on issues 
including the relation between the tradition-modernity or Japan-West in the development of Japanese cinema, 
the influence of Japanese films on the theory and practice of cinema abroad, and the ways in which cinema has 
served as a reflection of and an active agent in the transformation of Japanese society. Course includes several 
film screenings.(Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 261, but requires extra readings, assignments, and 
meeting times.) Instructor: Chow. One course.
669S. Minor Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examine the history and experiences of marginalized peoples in 
Japan from the Ainu to ethnic Koreans, from queer to the Okinawans, to challenge the myth of racial and ethnic 
homogeneity and sexual heteronormativity. Enhance understanding about cultural and artistic productions by 
reading a variety of texts, including fiction, oral histories, philosophical treatises, and films. Same as Asian and 
Middle Eastern Studies 469S, with extra graduate level assignments, discussion groups, and papers. Instructor: 
Ching. One course.
671. World of Korean Cinema. Introduction to Korean Cinema from postwar to contemporary period. 
Examination of issues such as national division, gender, pop culture, family, transnational identity and its 
influence abroad. Same as Asian and Middle Eastern Studies 471, but requires extra assignments. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
672. Two Koreas: History, Society and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ This course introduces the divided 
histories of North and South Korea and their contemporary legacies in regional and global contexts. The 
course will be organized around select topics and guest lectures. Some topics explored include colonization, 
modernization, division, war, migration, gender and sexuality, human rights, popular and political cultures, 
and globalization in comparative perspectives. This course will have additional readings, meeting times, and 
a substantially longer research paper requirement for graduate-level credit. The course will teach graduate 
students the foundational methods of conducting original research and writing a research paper by the end of 
the semester. Instructor: Kwon. One course.
674S. Orhan Pamuk and World Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Studies the novels and non-fiction of 
Nobel Laureate Orhan Pamuk as an introduction into ethics and politics of World Literature. Addresses social 
consequences of Pamuk’s role as an intellectual-author who mediates between the national tradition and an 
international canon. Political implications of Sufism, cultural revolution, Orientalism, and post-colonialism. 
Secondary focus on cosmopolitan Islam and the Ottoman Empire. Open to graduate students who must follow a 
comprehensive reading program and complete graduate-level assignments. No prerequisites; taught in English. 
Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 674S
683S. The City of Two Continents: Istanbul in Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Presents 
Istanbul, a city located in both Europe and Asia, as a site of political identities in conflict. Overview 
of contemporary literature and film set in Istanbul. Studies ethical implications of textual and visual 
representations of various people and groups interacting in urban spaces. Addresses the reasons for Turkey’s 
love-hate relationship with the Ottoman past and Europe. Historical background, modernity, identity, Islam, 
and cosmopolitanism. Open to graduate students who must follow a comprehensive reading program and 
complete graduate-level assignments. Knowledge of Turkish not required. Instructor: Göknar. One course. C-L: 
Slavic and Eurasian Studies 683S, Islamic Studies
687. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union. CCI, R Reading and assessment of new 



 Arabic (ARABIC)196

scholarship on Ottoman culture, society, politics, and state. Supplemented by critical texts on historiography, 
identity, gender, religion, and orientalism. Topics include “gazi thesis,” secular and Islamic law, “Kadi justice,” 
everyday life, and role of women. Final research project with interdisciplinary focus. Instructor: Goknar. One 
course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 687, Islamic Studies
690S. Special Topics in Asian and Middle Eastern Studies. Seminar version of Asian and Middle 
Eastern Studies 590. Topics vary each semester. One course.
695. Collaborative Research Projects. R Small collaborative research projects of faculty with graduate 
and undergraduate students. Close mentoring of students. Training in methods of cultural analysis and 
interpretation. Projects developed in conjunction with ongoing faculty initiatives. Students will present their 
research in the form of a term paper or some equivalent medium. Funding available to support students’ 
research. Director of Graduate Studies consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Arabic

Courses in Arabic (ARABIC)
99. Survival Arabic: Arabic Language and Culture of Lebanon, Jordan, and Palestine. CCI, 
FL Learning the basic elements of the Arabic language and culture of in Jordan, Lebanon, and Palestine 
(Shami/Levantine Arabic); developing listening, speaking, reading, writing and cultural proficiencies of the 
spoken language of this region, memorizing basic survival and communication language skills, learning how 
to write and read the Arabic alphabet in Modern standard Arabic; Introducing aspects of daily life, society and 
culture of these three countries. Open to students who have no prior exposure to Arabic language instruction 
before coming to Duke, and to students who are interested in doing civic engagement or study abroad in the 
Arabic speaking world. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Elementary Arabic. FL Understanding, speaking, reading, and writing modern standard Arabic. 
Language laboratory. Instructor: Lo. One course.
102. Elementary Arabic. FL Continuation of Arabic 101. Prerequisite: Arabic 101 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Lo. One course.
203. Intermediate Arabic. CZ, FL Reading, composition, and conversation in modern standard Arabic. 
Readings include selections from the Qur’an, contemporary literature, and the Arabic press. Prerequisite: Arabic 
102 or equivalent. Instructor: Habib. One course.
204. Intermediate Arabic. CZ, FL Continuation of Arabic 203. Prerequisite: Arabic 203 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
281. Media Arabic I: Arabic in Media and Documentary Film. CZ, FL Development of students 
proficiency in speaking, writing, reading, and listening comprehension through exposure to a wide variety 
of Arabic texts taken from newspapers, magazines and websites from around the Arab world, with focus on 
specialized vocabulary of media Arabic and documentary films. Explore media materials and programs from 
al-Jazeera news and documentary films. Students will also learn to hold informed discussions and write analyses 
and reports of current events and debates that are related to these materials. Instructor: Habib. One course.
283. Media Arabic II. CZ, FL Focus on further expansion of speaking, writing, reading, and listening skills 
through selected materials of media Arabic taken from written news sources, TV and Internet programs. Focus 
on changes in Arab popular culture, language of the Arab revolution and language of the new social media. 
Develop students’ abilities to conduct research using a variety of media sources. Prerequisite: Arabic 204 or 281. 
Instructor: Habib. One course.
288. Conversational Egyptian Arabic. CCI, CZ, FL To develop speaking and reading proficiency level in 
conversational Egyptian Arabic within a cultural context: idiomatic expressions, social interaction, understand 
customs, and holiday traditions; memorize a set of songs of the 2011 Revolution. Students will visit local Arab/ 
Egyptian cultural associations, religious sites and families; develop profiles of local Egyptians and their journeys 
through interviews and discussion sessions. Course includes a service-learning component working with the 
community. Prerequisites: Arabic 204, or instructor’s permission. Instructor: Shabaka. One course.
290A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Arabic. Topics vary each semester. 



Arabic (ARABIC) 197

Instructor: Staff. One course.
295. Arabic Dialect in Music. CZ, FL Exposure to wide variety of Arabic modes of expression through 
Arabic music. Learn usage of both standard and colloquial Arabic in producing Arabic music. Deal with 
linguistic differences in materials selected from popular media as well as classical sources. Develop skills in 
speaking, reading, and listening comprehension beyond intermediate high level. Exposure to Arabic musical 
traditions language. Introduces some Arabic scales (Maqamat), genres, rhythms and musical instruments, 
namely Oud, Qanoun and Nay and their usage in language production. Prerequisite: Arabic 203. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
296A. Dardasha Arabiyyah: Moroccan Dialect and Culture. CCI, CZ, FL Course facilitates full 
immersion in Arabic of Morocco within a cultural context; students will develop basic communicative skills 
through emphasis on all four language skills beyond the elementary level; through daily instructions, home-
stay, field visits, exposure to short stories, and interviewing citizens, students will acquire a communicative skill 
and a strong understanding of society and culture; students will explore cultural institutions and entertainment 
outlets. Offered in the Duke in the Arab World Study Abroad Program. Instructor: Lo. One course.
304. Advanced Levantine Arabic Language and Culture. CCI, FL This is a proficiency-oriented 
Levantine (Lebanon, Jordan, Palestine, and Syria) Arabic. It focuses on a complex functional use of the 
language; explores a variety of complex topics related to daily life, work, formal and information interactions; 
explores popular culture through personal interviews, music, and online publications. Students will also read 
and rehearse song lyrics in a range of communicative contexts. Class materials will consist of authentic texts, 
biographical information, online postings and films. Prerequisite: Arabic 287, or 2 years of MSA beyond 
intermediate level or equivalent. Instructor: Ben Tarif. One course.
305. Advanced Arabic. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in classical and contemporary fiction and nonfiction. Works 
include al-Jahiz, Ibn Arabi, Taha Husain, Ibn Battuta, Ghada al-Samman and 1001 Nights. Prerequisite: Arabic 
204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
306. Advanced Arabic. ALP, FL Continuation of Arabic 305. Prerequisite: Arabic 305 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
328S. Literary Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL The Qur’an as scripture; mystical poetry; stories of the early 
community; literary cultures in the early community; modern reinterpretations of Islamic sources; Islamist 
literature; modern Islamic poetry, novels, plays, and stories. Prerequisite: 2 years of Arabic. Instructor: 
McLarney. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
407. Issues in Arabic Language and Literature I. ALP, CCI, FL Readings and other material, including 
films, television, and radio broadcasts. Exercises in composition. Prerequisite: Arabic 306 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Cooke. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
408. Issues in Arabic Language and Literature II. ALP, FL Continuation of Arabic 407. Prerequisite: 
Arabic 306 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Cooke. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
501S. Translation as a Research Tool in Arabic and Islamic Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Introduces 
advanced students of Arabic to the science of translation as a major tool to pursue research in Arabic and 
Islamic studies. Learn techniques of translating Arabic text, editing, accessing biographical translation. Teach 
students how to translate literary text, religious text etc. (Qur’an, Hadith, poetry, etc.) Instructor: Jaward. One 
course. C-L: Islamic Studies
610S. Quranic Arabic: Tafsir and Tajwid. ALP, FL This is a study of the features and structure of classical 
Arabic with an emphasis on the sciences of Tajwid/Tajweed and Tafsir. Students will learn the various styles, 
periods and schools in Tafsir and Tajwid. They will read excerpts from the classical schools of Tafsir, and the 
main characteristics of each. Memorizing and rehearsing selected verses for Tajwid are required in this course. 
Prerequisite: a minimum of two semesters of Arabic beyond the advanced level. Instructor: Lo. One course.
690. Special Readings. Variable credit.



 Chinese (CHINESE) 198

Chinese

Courses in Chinese (CHINESE) 
101. First-Year Chinese I. FL First semester of a two-semester sequence. Designed for students with little or 
no knowledge of the Chinese language. Aim at developing basic communicative proficiency in Mandarin Chinese 
with equal attention to aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Learn some Chinese cultural 
facts and social-cultural etiquette when developing basic communicative competence in Chinese. Recognize and 
write approximately 250-300 characters by the end of the semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101A. First-Year Chinese. First semester of a two-semester sequence. Designed for students with little or no 
knowledge of the Chinese language. Aim at developing basic communicative proficiency in Mandarin Chinese 
with equal attention to aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Learn some Chinese cultural 
facts and social-cultural etiquette when developing basic communicative competence in Chinese. Recognize and 
write approximately 250-300 characters by the end of the semester. Offered through the Duke Study in China 
program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. First-Year Chinese II. FL Continuation of Chinese 101. Designed for students with little knowledge of 
the Chinese language. Focus on developing basic communicative proficiency in Mandarin Chinese with equal 
attention to aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Learn some Chinese cultural facts and 
social-cultural etiquette when developing basic communicative competence in Chinese. Recognize and write 
approximately 300 characters by the end of the semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
105D. First-Year Chinese in Review I. FL Consolidate learning the basic elements of Chinese language 
and culture. Equal attention paid to the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing proficiencies. 
Introduction to aspects of Chinese life and culture. Open to students who had received some Chinese language 
instruction before coming to Duke but lacked a solid foundation in basic Chinese grammar and pronunciation. 
Not open for credit to students who grew up in a household speaking Mandarin Chinese. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
106. First-Year Chinese in Review II. FL Second semester First Year Chinese for students who have had 
some background in Mandarin Chinese before coming to Duke, but who do not qualify for the heritage track. 
Reviews the essential elements of First Year Chinese in the Chinese cultural context. Equal attention paid to 
the development of listening, speaking, reading and writing proficiencies and cultural literacy. Not open for 
credit to students who grew up in a household speaking mandarin Chinese, or to students who began their 
study of Chinese at Duke with no previous contact with the language. Students must contact the instructor 
for a proficiency assessment before signing up for the course. Prerequisite: Chinese 105 or instructor consent. 
Instructor: Lee. One course.
131. First Year Chinese for Bilingual Learners. FL Designed for students who were raised in a Chinese-
speaking environment and who can converse about personal information or daily topics but have little or no 
reading and writing skills in Mandarin Chinese. Gain knowledge of the etymologies of Chinese characters and 
writing system. Substantial work on the development of reading and writing competencies in Chinese while 
continuing to improve aural understanding and speaking competency. Topics focus on issues concerning the 
aspects of bilingual and bicultural experiences specifically addressed for Chinese heritage learners. Instructor: 
Yao. One course.
203. Intermediate Chinese. FL Second-year level Mandarin Chinese. Prerequisite: Chinese 102 or its 
equivalent. Not open to students who have completed Chinese 232 or 242. Aiming to enhance students’ abilities 
in conversing on personal topics in informal situations, in reading and writing narrative and descriptive texts, 
and in analyzing the structure of Chinese language. Instructor: Staff. One course.
204. Intermediate Chinese. CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Chinese 203. Prerequisite: Chinese 203 or its 
equivalent. Not open to students who have completed Chinese 232 or 242. Continued work on consolidating 
the language abilities and skills acquired in Chinese 203. Specific emphasis on building the ability to converse 
on some social issues in formal situations, to read and write not only extended narrative and descriptive texts 
but also some expository texts, and to analyze the structure of Chinese language and the uniqueness of Chinese 
culture. Instructor: Staff. One course.
205. Intermediate-Mid Chinese. FL Second-year level Chinese for students who have completed Chinese 



Chinese (CHINESE)  199

105 or its equivalent. Not open to students who grew up in a household speaking Mandarin Chinese. Aim to 
enhance the abilities in conversing on personal topics in informal situations and some social issues in formal 
situations. Focus on improving skills for reading and writing narrative, descriptive, and some expository texts, 
on developing analytical knowledge of the Chinese language structure, and on enhancing cultural literacy. 
Instructor: Hsieh.
223A. Intensive Progress in Chinese. FL Offered in the Duke Study in China Program at the University 
of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
224A. Intensive Progress in Chinese. FL Continuation of Chinese 223A. Offered in the Duke Study in 
China Program at the University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
232. Intermediate Chinese for Bilingual Learners. FL Continuation of Chinese 131. Further 
development of reading and writing fluency and competencies through studying a range of topics consisting of 
more complex vocabulary and grammatical structures. Content covering necessary understanding of language 
and cultural heritage concerning Chinese customs, civilization, and history. Prerequisite: Chinese 131 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Yao. One course.
271T. Voices in Philosophy: Chinese Tutorial. Discussion-based course trains students to read and 
analyze core philosophical texts in Chinese, typically in conjunction with a lecture course offered in philosophy. 
Classes include close readings of original texts, discussions of interpretation and application in variety of other 
forms (including film, documentary, multimedia) and real-life situations. Students examine how language/
culture impact our understanding of core philosophical texts through attention to issues such as translation, 
vernacular, and word choice. Tutorials meet weekly for 75 minutes. Recommended prerequisite: Chinese 306 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 271T
305D. Advanced Intermediate Chinese. CCI, CZ, FL Designed for Chinese as a foreign/second language. 
Follows Chinese 204 or 224A as part of the language sequence. Increases students’ knowledge of more complex 
forms of the Chinese vocabulary system and competencies in speaking, aural comprehension, reading, and 
writing. Exposure to a speech variety appropriate to formal and informal speech situations. Materials drawn 
from newspaper articles, essays, and other readings concerning social and cultural issues in contemporary 
Chinese society. Emphasis on the active use of the language for communication in written and spoken forms. 
Recommended prerequisite: Chinese 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
306. Advanced Chinese II. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Chinese 305. Designed for Chinese as a 
foreign/second language. Builds knowledge of more sophisticated linguistic forms and learning to differentiate 
between different types of written and spoken discourse. Development of writing skills in selected formats 
and genres while continuing to develop correct use of speech patterns and vocabulary and cross-cultural 
understanding. Content drawn from newspaper articles, essays, and other readings concerning social and 
cultural issues in contemporary Chinese society. Prerequisite: Chinese 305 or equivalent. Instructor: Yao. One 
course.
321S. Business and Interculturality in the Chinese Society. CCI, CZ, FL Introduction to the basis 
of China’s Economic Reform from the late 1970s to 1990s, China’s changing social and macro-economic 
environment, and cross-cultural issues relating to cultural norms and value system in the business context. 
Focus on oral, written and intercultural communication, product marketing, business practices and protocols, 
and case studies in mainland Chinese society. Prerequisite: Chinese 204/205 or equivalent. Instructor: Lee. One 
course.
321SA. Business and Interculturality in Chinese Society. CCI, CZ, FL Study abroad version of Chinese 
321S with modifications made to accommodate internship component of course content. Introduction to topics 
related to recruitment, business negotiation, e-commerce, logistics management, international investment, 
etc. and specialized terminology for the Chinese-speaking workplace. Focus on oral, written and intercultural 
communication, product marketing, business practices and protocols, and case studies in mainland Chinese 
society. Recommended prerequisite: Chinese 325A. Instructor: Staff. One course.
325A. Advanced Progress in Chinese. CCI, FL Third-year Chinese. Offered in the Duke Study in China 
Program at the University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. Consent of instructor 



 Chinese (CHINESE) 200

required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
326A. Advanced Progress in Chinese. CCI, FL Continuation of Chinese 325A. Third-year Chinese. Offered 
in the Duke Study in China Program at the University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. 
Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
331D. Modern Chinese Society and Culture through New Media. CCI, CZ, FL This course is a 
continuation of Chinese 232. In this class, students will cover different social and cultural challenges that China 
is facing nowadays through a thematic approach. Course content will be drawn from Chinese broadcast news, 
blogs and videos, TV shows, and documentary films. This course aims to improve learners’ listening, speaking, 
reading, and writing skills. Prerequisite: Chinese 232 or equivalent proficiency. Instructor: He. One course.
332. Chinese Translation and Interpretation. CCI, FL A third-year Chinese course focusing on Chinese 
translation and interpretation skills with the aim to improve students’ comprehension and communication 
abilities in Chinese. Different genres of authentic reading texts and real-life audio and video materials used 
as course materials. Topics to be covered closely related to culture, literature, society, business/economy, 
and science/technology. Teacher’s lectures of skills combined with students’ practices as the course format. 
Linguistic features and cultural practices between English and Chinese will be compared and demonstrated. 
Prerequisite: Chinese 232, Chinese 242, or their equivalent. Instructor: Liu. One course.
333. Advanced Chinese for Bilingual Learners. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Chinese 232, Literacy 
in Chinese. Designed for Chinese as a second language. Practice in formal and informal speech and discourse 
in speaking and writing. Content drawn from newspaper articles, essays, TV and radio broadcasts concerning 
social and cultural issues in contemporary China. Develops fluency and skills in writing expository essays 
and short stories (narrative) while continuing to advance understanding of heritage culture and aural/oral 
proficiency. Prerequisite: Chinese 232 or equivalent proficiency. Instructor: Staff. One course.
371S. Classical Chinese in the Modern Context I. ALP, FL Introduction to Classical Chinese for the basic 
reader. Historical background of essential texts in the ancient period, covering classical literature, philosophy, 
and history. Focus on grammar, systematic sentence analysis, and distinctive functions of grammatical particles. 
A gateway to advanced literary reading and writing (shu-mian-yu). Enhancement of knowledge of classical 
literature, philosophy, and history. Recommend consultation with instructor before enrolling in course. 
Prerequisite: Chinese 333 or Chinese 407S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
407S. Issues in Chinese Language and Society I. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Materials from public media used to 
analyze diverse social phenomena and cultural issues in contemporary China. Major focus on developing literary 
reading and writing skills along with learning methods of writing academic Chinese essays on a wide range of 
complex topics. Topics include popular culture, food, marriage outlooks, Cultural Revolution, Confucianism, 
and social issues after the economic reform in China. Analysis of cultural and literary texts from variety of media 
and genres providing a basis for practice in discussion and writing. Instructors: Lee and Staff. One course.
408S. Issues in Chinese Language and Society II. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL See Chinese 407S. Prerequisite: 
Chinese 305, 306, 427A, 428A, 473A, 474A, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
421SA. The Culture of Business and Economics in Chinese. CCI, CZ, FL Designed for students 
enrolled in the DSIC business Chinese track with practicum. Introduction to topics relevant to business and 
efficiency, enterprise management, international trade, economic regulations, environmental protection and 
economic development in the Chinese business context, and specialized terminology for the Chinese-speaking 
workplace. Focus on oral, written and intercultural communication, product marketing, business practices and 
protocols, and case studies in mainland Chinese society. Instructor: He. One course.
427A. Intensive Advanced Chinese. ALP, CCI, FL Study of diverse public media in which Mandarin 
Chinese is the principal language of communication. Includes interviews, methods of writing Chinese essays, 
and rhetorical analysis on a range of topics. Equivalent of fourth-year Chinese. Offered in the Duke Study in 
China Program at the University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Hebrew (HEBREW) 201

428A. Intensive Advanced Chinese. ALP, CCI, FL Continuation of Chinese 427A. Equivalent of fourth-
year Chinese. Offered in the Duke Study in China Program at the University of International Business and 
Economics, Beijing, China. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
435S. Chinese in the Humanities I. ALP, CCI, FL Designed for advanced learners of Chinese as a second 
language. Study short stories by prominent writers published in the late 1990s. Stories focus on the concerns 
of human beings, touching upon contemporary themes such as the recollections of the Cultural Revolution, the 
impact of commercialization of the traditional family, sex, drugs and crime, etc. Advance analytical competency 
in the language and cultural literacy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
436S. Chinese in the Humanities II. ALP, CCI, FL Continuation of Selected Readings in Contemporary 
Chinese Literature I. Designed for advanced learners of Chinese as a second language. Further development of 
literary reading and writing skills on a range of formal topics. Advancing analytical competency in the language 
and cultural literacy. Content drawn from authentic materials and literary work by prominent writers in 
contemporary China. Instructor: Staff. One course.
450S. Understanding China and the United States: Stereotypes, Conflicts, and Common 
Challenges. CCI, CZ, FL Designed for Chinese international students and students who have finished fourth-
year Chinese language courses with an aim to enhance students’ intercultural knowledge and intercultural 
communication skills. Authentic reading texts and video/movie clips in English and Chinese used as prompts for 
class discussions and course projects.Covers the stereotypes about the two countries and the two cultures, the 
history of Sino-US relations, the common challenges for both countries. Prerequisite: successful completion of at 
least one 400-level Chinese course or approval of instructor. Instructor: Liu. One course.
455. Modern Chinese Culture: Narratives of Home and Abroad. ALP, CCI, FL Major works in 
Chinese literature, film, and other cultural media in their creation of the spectacle of “Modern China” at home 
and abroad. All reading materials and class discussion in Chinese. Prerequisite: Chinese language proficiency at 
the fourth year level or the equivalent. Instructor: Liu. One course.
456. Aspects of Chinese Culture and Society. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Topics in Chinese culture and society 
including media, popular culture, literature, and the arts of China. Prerequisite: Chinese language proficiency at 
the fourth-year level or the equivalent. Instructor: Liu. One course.
473A. Current Issues in Modern Chinese I. CCI, CZ, FL Equivalent to fifth year. Discussion based on 
oral and written reports and topical readings. Offered in the Duke Study in China Program at the University of 
International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. Instructor: Staff. One course.
474A. Current Issues in Modern Chinese II. CCI, CZ, FL Equivalent to fifth year. Readings and 
discussion of selections from modern Chinese literature, expository prose, and the Chinese press. Offered in 
the Duke Study in China Program at the University of International Business and Economics, Beijing, China. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.

Hebrew 

Courses in Hebrew (HEBREW)
101. Elementary Modern Hebrew. FL Introduction to speaking, understanding, reading, and writing 
modern Hebrew. Language laboratory. Instructor: Plesser. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 101
102. Elementary Modern Hebrew. FL Continuation of Hebrew 101. Consent of instructor required. 
Prerequisite: Hebrew 101 or equivalent. Instructor: Plesser. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 102
203. Intermediate Modern Hebrew. ALP, FL Reading, composition, conversation, and language 
laboratory. Consent of instructor required. Prerequisite: Hebrew 101, 102 or equivalent. Instructor: Plesser. One 
course. C-L: Jewish Studies 203
204. Intermediate Modern Hebrew. ALP, CZ, FL Continuation of Hebrew 203. Consent of instructor 
required. Prerequisite: Hebrew 203 or equivalent. Instructor: Plesser. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 204
305S. Advanced Modern Hebrew. ALP, CCI, FL Introduction to modern Hebrew literature and Israeli 
culture. Emphasis on critical reading of literary and cultural texts, including prose, poetry, drama, and film. 
Conducted in Hebrew. Consent of instructor required. Prerequisite: Hebrew 204 or equivalent. Instructor: 



 Hindi (HINDI)202

Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 305S, International Comparative Studies
306S. Advanced Modern Hebrew. ALP, CCI, FL Continuation of Hebrew 305S. Consent of instructor 
required. Prerequisite: Hebrew 305S or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 306S
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
407S. Issues in Modern Hebrew. ALP, CCI, FL Readings and other material, including films, television, 
and radio broadcasts. Exercises in composition. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Ginsburg. One 
course. C-L: Jewish Studies 407S
455S. Introduction to Israeli Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Historical survey of Israeli culture from 1948 
to the present. All reading materials and class discussion in Hebrew. Prerequisite: Hebrew 306 or above, or 
placement test or instructor’s consent. Instructor: Ginsburg. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 455S

Hindi 

Courses in Hindi (HINDI)
101. Elementary Hindi. FL This course will provide students with knowledge and understanding of the Hindi 
language and Indian culture. The major goal is to develop practical ability to communicate in Hindi for day-to-
day needs. Topics include the Hindi script, basic grammar and sentence structure, and development of language 
skills in reading, writing, listening, and speaking. No previous knowledge of Hindi required. Instructor: 
Knapczyk. One course.
102. Elementary Hindi. FL This course continues with practice in the Hindi script, basic grammar, and 
sentence structure, including past and future tenses. The focus is on developing practical skills in Hindi through 
speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Prerequisite: Hindi 101 or a placement test. Instructor: Kusum. One 
course.
203D. Intermediate Hindi. CZ, FL Students will practice all language skills, including reading, writing, 
listening, and speaking. Students will learn to communicate and describe their surroundings in all tenses, follow 
Bollywood movies, short stories, and news articles. The focus is on Indian culture and diversity. Prerequisite: 
Hindi 102 or a placement test. Instructor: Knapczyk. One course.
204D. Intermediate Hindi. CZ, FL Students will advance in all language skills, including reading, writing, 
listening, and speaking. Authentic materials such as magazines, newspapers, TV serials, stories, and movies 
will be used frequently to practice Hindi grammar and vocabulary. Prerequisite: Hindi 203 or a placement test. 
Instructor: Knapczyk. One course.
270T-4. Voices in Global Health: Hindi Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Global Health 270T-4; also C-L: 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 270T-4
305. Advanced Hindi. ALP, CCI, FL Proficiency in reading, writing, and speaking. Prerequisite: Hindi 204 
or equivalent. Instructor: Khanna. One course.
306. Advanced Hindi. ALP, CCI, FL Continuation of Hindi 305. Prerequisite: Hindi 305 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Khanna. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-1. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
407S. Issues in Hindi Language and Society II. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in prevailing literary and 



Japanese (JPN)  203

mass media forms. Prerequisite: Hindi 306 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Khanna. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
408S. Issues in Hindi Language and Society II. ALP, CCI, FL Continuation of Hindi 407S. Prerequisite: 
Hindi 306 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Khanna. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies

Japanese 

Courses in Japanese (JPN) 
101. Elementary Japanese. FL Introduction to speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Instructor: 
Kurokawa. One course.
102. Elementary Japanese. FL Continuation of Japanese 101. Recommended perequisite: Japanese 101 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Kurokawa. One course.
203. Intermediate Japanese. CZ, FL Continuation of Japanese 102. Continued development of the four 
language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Cultural component emphasized through short 
readings. Instructor: Endo. One course.
204. Intermediate Japanese. CZ, FL Continuation of Japanese 203. Prerequisite: Japanese 203 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Endo. One course.
305. Advanced Japanese. ALP, CCI, FL Readings and other materials, including video. Exercises in 
composition and conversation. Instructor: Kurokawa. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
306. Advanced Japanese. ALP, CCI, FL Continuation of Japanese 305. Prerequisite: Japanese 305 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Kurokawa. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
407S. Issues in Japanese Language and Society I. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings and other materials, 
including television and radio broadcasts. Exercises in composition. Instructor: Saito. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
408S. Issues in Japanese Language and Society II. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Japanese 407S. 
Instructor: Saito. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
451S. Readings in Japanese Texts. ALP, FL Focus on developing interpretive and expressive abilities in 
both speaking and writing through reading short stories and novels being made into films. Students are required 
to have high levels of proficiency in both speaking and writing. Prerequisites: Japanese 408S or equivalent. 
Instructor: Saito. One course.
471S. Topics in Classical Japanese (Bungo). ALP, CCI, FL Selected readings in ancient, medieval, 
early modern, and modern texts, prose and poetry. Examples: Heike monogatari , Makura no sôshi, Oku 
no hosomichi, Hyakunin isshu, Tsurezuregusa, and Gakumon no susume. Emphasis on nuanced, in depth 
understandings of classical grammar. Translation of major texts in the classical tradition. Prerequisite: Japanese 
408S or permission of instructor. Instructor: Tucker. One course.
650. Research Methods in Japanese (B). CCI, SS Introduction to various research approaches to literary, 
sociological, and historical studies of Japan. Emphasis on bibliographical sources that best serve needs in 
chosen area of specialization. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 503, 
Sociology 664

Korean 

Courses in Korean (KOREAN) 
101. Elementary Korean. FL Designed for true beginners with no prior knowledge of Korean, introduces 
the basics of Korean. The sounds of spoken Korean, the writing system Hangul, and greetings; basic 



 Persian (PERSIAN)204

communication, fundamentals of grammar, and elementary reading skills for simple sentences. Instructor: E. 
Kim. One course.
102. Elementary Korean. FL Continuation of Korean 101. Developing speaking and listening skills for 
everyday personal communication; reading simple narratives and descriptions; learning core grammatical 
patterns. Prerequisite: Korean 101 or equivalent (knowledge of Hangul and rudimentary speaking ability). 
Instructor: E. Kim. One course.
203. Intermediate Korean. FL Focus on developing reading skills for narrative and descriptive texts, and 
on writing. Practice in listening and speaking in social settings with peers and colleagues; development of 
complexity and sociolinguistic appropriateness in speech. Prerequisite: Korean 102 or equivalent (ability to 
communicate in service encounters and express oneself in basic personal situations). Instructor: E. Kim. One 
course.
204. Intermediate Korean. CZ, FL Continuation of Korean 203. Listening and speaking about cultural 
practices and historical events, reading and writing informative and expository texts, and honing grammatical 
usage and vocabulary choice. Prerequisite: Korean 203 or equivalent (ability to speak on daily topics fluently 
and to read simple stories). Instructor: E. Kim. One course.
305. Advanced Korean. ALP, CCI, FL Listening and speaking about cultural, social, and political issues; 
reading and responding to authentic texts; honing grammatical usage at the discourse level. Prerequisite: 
Korean 204 or equivalent (fluency in speaking, familiarity with culture, and experience in reading at grade 1 to 3 
level). Instructor: Kim. One course.
306S. Advanced Korean. CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Korean 305. Introduction to Chinese characters; 
focus on reading and discussing authentic texts on modern Korean history and its social and cultural legacies. 
Prerequisite: Korean 305 or equivalent (fluency in speaking, familiarity with culture, and experience in reading 
at grade 4 or 5 level). Instructor: Kim. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
407S. Issues in Korean Language and Society I. ALP, CCI, FL Focus on developing interpretive 
and expressive abilities through reading and discussions of essays, short stories, and newspaper articles. 
Prerequisite: Korean 306S or equivalent. Instructor: Kim. One course.
408S. Issues in Korean Language and Society II. ALP, CCI, FL Continue developing interpretive 
and expressive abilities through reading and discussions of essays, short stories, and newspaper articles. 
Prerequisite: Korean 407S or equivalent. Instructor: Kim. One course.
455S. Korean Politics and Society: Academic Reading and Writing. CCI, CZ, EI, FL, SS An 
advanced class for students having completed a fourth year course in Korean, or for international students 
schooled in Korea. Explores controversial issues in contemporary South Korea such as economic aid to North 
Korea, restrictions on online anonymity, legal status of immigrants, the US-Korea Free Trade Agreement, 
revision of National Security Laws, with focus on their ethical dimensions, diverging perspectives, underlying 
ideologies, and historical contexts. Course materials drawn from media and academic publications in Korean. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.

Persian (Farsi)

Courses in Persian (PERSIAN)
101. Elementary Persian. FL Introduction to spoken and literary Persian: understanding, speaking, reading, 
and writing. Language laboratory drill. Instructor: Naeymi-Rad. One course.
102. Elementary Persian. FL Continuation of Persian 101. Instructor: Naeymi-Rad. One course.
203. Intermediate Persian. FL Four hours of classroom work. Advanced reading and composition in 
classical Persian. Prerequisite: elementary Persian. Instructor: Naeymi-Rad. One course.



Sanskrit (SANSKRIT) 205

204. Intermediate Persian. FL Continuation of Persian 203. Instructor: Naeymi-Rad. One course.
305. Advanced Persian. CCI, CZ, FL Reading, speaking and presentations about cultural, social, 
political and historical issues. Honing grammatical usage at the discourse level. Instructor consent required. 
Prerequisite: Persian 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Naeymi-Rad. One course.
306. Advanced Persian. CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Persian 305. Reading, speaking and presentations 
about cultural, social, political and historical issues. Honing grammatical usage at the discourse level. 
Recommended prerequisite: Persian 305 or equivalent. Instructor: Adel. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Persian. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Sanskrit 

Course in Sanskrit (SANSKRIT)
391. Independent Study. Individual study of language for conducting research involving sources written or 
spoken in the language. Students have to submit a proposal describing the purported research, types of sources 
to be analyzed, and kinds of language knowledge or skills they need to be equipped with. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course. 

Tibetan

Courses in Tibetan (TIBETAN)
101. Elementary Tibetan I. FL Introductory Tibetan language course for students who have little to no 
knowledge of Tibetan. Development of speaking, listening, reading, writing skills through Tibetan concepts, 
grammar and syntax of spoken and written Tibetan. Topics include situations of everyday life (e.g. greetings, 
introductions, family, habits/hobbies, making appointments, food, visiting friends, weather, shopping, etc.) 
as well as aspects of Tibetan people and culture (e.g. songs, short stories, etc.). Course taught at University of 
Virginia; Duke students participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. One course.
102. Elementary Tibetan II. FL Continuation of Tibetan 101. Prerequisite: Tibetan 101 or equivalent. 
Development of speaking, listening, reading, writing skills through Tibetan concepts, grammar and syntax of 
spoken and written Tibetan. Topics include situations of everyday life (e.g. greetings, introductions, family, 
habits/hobbies, making appointments, food, visiting friends, weather, shopping, etc.) as well as aspects of 
Tibetan people and culture (e.g. songs, short stories, etc.). Course taught at University of Virginia; Duke students 
participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Instructor: Staff. One course.
203. Intermediate Tibetan I. FL Intermediate skill-building in the grammar and syntax of spoken and 
written Tibetan, along with development of skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing through the 
integrated use of spoken and literary forms. Students will also enhance their knowledge of Tibetan culture in 
order to improve their communication skills. Course taught at University of Virginia; Duke students participate 
through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Prerequisite: TIBETAN 102 Elementary Tibetan II or 
equivalent. One course.
204. Intermediate Tibetan II. CZ, FL Intermediate skill-building in the grammar and syntax of spoken 
and written Tibetan, along with development of skills in listening, speaking, reading and writing through the 
integrated use of spoken and literary forms. Students will also enhance their knowledge of Tibetan culture in 
order to improve their communication skills. Course taught at University of Virginia; Duke students participate 
through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Prerequisite: TIBETAN 203 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Nepali. One course.
301. Advanced Modern Tibetan I. FL A continuation of the Intermediate Tibetan language sequence, 



 Turkish (TURKISH)206

focusing on advanced grammar, syntax, and structures. Emphasis is laid on mastering comprehension and 
communication in colloquial Tibetan, writing skills in the various scripts of literary Tibetan, and integrating 
comprehension of colloquial and literary forms. Course taught at University of Virginia; Duke students 
participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. Prerequisite: Tibetan 204 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Nepali. One course.
302. Advanced Modern Tibetan II. FL A continuation of the Advanced Modern Tibetan I course, focusing 
on advanced grammar, syntax, and structures, as well as texts from a variety of media and genre: conversation 
transcripts, lecture transcripts, newspaper articles, academic essays, short stories, dramatic/comedy skits, 
magazine articles, radio-TV transcripts. Emphasis is laid on mastering comprehension and communication in 
colloquial Tibetan, writing skills in the various scripts of literary Tibetan, and integrating comprehension of 
colloquial and literary forms. Course taught at University of Virginia; Duke students participate through video 
conference and/or telepresence classroom. Prerequisite: Tibetan 301 or equivalent. Instructor: Nepali. One 
course.

Turkish

Courses in Turkish (TURKISH)
101. Elementary Turkish. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Turkish. In-
structor: Staff. One course.

102. Elementary Turkish. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Turkish. 
Second half of Turkish 101, 102. Prerequisite: Turkish 101. Instructor: Staff. One course.
203D. Intermediate Turkish. FL Covers the Intermediate Turkish language curriculum. Practice in 
understanding, speaking, readings, and writing Turkish, and an introduction to some aspects of Turkish 
cultures. Discussion hours are required. Instructor: Havlioglu. One course.
204. Intermediate Turkish. FL Classroom and laboratory practice in spoken and written Turkish in 
various cultural contexts. Readings/viewings in a variety of original source material from newspapers to films. 
Prerequisites: Turkish 203 or equivalent. Instructor: Goknar. One course.
232A. The Cognitive Science of Religion and Morality. CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 
232A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 224A, Religion 281A
305. Contemporary Turkish Composition and Readings. CCI, FL Advanced grammar and syntax with 
intense composition component. Analytical readings in the original. Prerequisite: Turkish 204 or permission of 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
306. Contemporary Turkish Composition and Readings. CCI, FL Continuation of Turkish 305. 
Prerequisite: Turkish 305 or permission of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Turkish Independent Study. ALP, CCI, FL Guided reading and writing program for students of 
Turkish with a focus on research into primary source texts in Turkish. Students desiring to take this course must 
have proficiency at the third year level of higher. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Göknar, Havlioglu. 
One course.
407S. Issues in Turkish Language and Literature I. FL Materials from high and popular culture used 
to analyze diverse social phenomena and cultural issues in contemporary Turkey. Major focus on developing 
literary reading and writing skills along with learning methods of writing academic Turkish essays on a 
wide range of complex topics. Topics include popular politics, culture, literature, cinema and social issues in 
Turkey. Analysis of cultural and literary texts from variety of media and genres providing a basis for practice 
in discussion and writing. Prerequisite: Turkish 302S or permission of instructor. Instructor: Havlioglu. One 
course.
690S. Special Topics in Turkish Studies. Special Topics in Turkish Studies. Topics vary by course or 
section. Instructor: Tuna or Staff. One course.



Urdu (URDU) 207

Urdu

Course in Urdu (URDU)
101. The Urdu Script. FL Learn how to read and write the Urdu script (Nastaliq); review basic grammar 
topics; reading and writing assignments based on the website Darvazah. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
102. Urdu and Its Cultures. CZ, FL This course continues with practice in the Urdu script, basic grammar, 
and sentence structure, including past and future tenses. The focus is on developing practical skills in Urdu 
through speaking, listening, reading, and writing. Introduces students to critical issues in Indian-Pakistani 
society, history, and culture. Recommended prerequisite: Urdu 101 or a placement test. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.

The Major
The Department of Asian & Middle Eastern Studies explores the cultures of the cities, nations, and regions 

of East Asia, the Indian Subcontinent, and the Middle East within the framework of the humanities. It provides 
students with an understanding of the languages, histories, cultural practices, and perspectives of these regions 
to prepare them for professional work or advanced graduate studies in the international arenas. The curriculum 
is designed to develop reflective, critical thinking and conceptually grounded understanding of the contemporary 
cultures of Asia and the Middle East within a global, geopolitical context. The coursework for the major provides an 
intellectual training that includes the study of languages and of cultural practices as well as of critical frameworks 
for the analysis of cultural perspectives. The concentration of the major is determined by the language of study: 
Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Persian, or Turkish. The department also offers coursework 
in Tibetan. To major in Asian and Middle Eastern studies, students should take at least ten courses (no fewer than 
ten credits) in the department, distributed as follows:

• For advanced linguistic skills, students should take at least two language courses at the 300 level in one 
AMES language or one course at the 400 level or above. Students may take up to six language classes 
altogether, not necessarily in one language. Students whose competence in a language exceeds the most 
advanced language course offered by the department may substitute language courses with literature/
culture courses at the 100 level or above. 100-level language courses do not count toward the major.

• For a critical engagement with the cultural traditions of Asia and the Middle East, students are required 
to take four to nine AMES literature/culture courses at the 100 level or above, but no more than two 
courses at the 100 level. 
1. Students are required to take an AMES Gateway Course. 
2. Students should identify one main AMES regional or thematic pathway and complete at least three 

courses in the chosen pathway. Regional pathways include: (i) The Middle East; (ii) East Asia; 
(iii) The Indian Subcontinent. Thematic pathways include: (i) Race, Religion, Class, Gender; (ii) 
Empire, Nation, Migration; and (iii) Literature, Culture, Media.

• For reflection on their academic trajectory and their accomplishments in studying the languages and 
cultures of Asia and the Middle East, students turn in a senior portfolio at the conclusion of their final 
semester. The portfolio includes research papers, papers in AMES languages, creative works, and 
publications when applicable. 

Study Abroad. Study abroad should be an integral part of the student’s experience will be study abroad; 
while not a requirement of the major, it is strongly encouraged. Students should discuss this option as early as 
possible with their major advisor. Students who study abroad may transfer up to five language credits and up to 
two literature and culture credits, but no more than five credits altogether, toward their major in Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies.

Advising. Majors will be advised by AMES regular-ranked faculty.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Majors with grade point averages of 3.5 or higher in the major may apply in their junior year to the director 

of undergraduate studies for Graduation with Distinction (see the section on honors in this bulletin). Students 
working on their honors thesis will take AMES 493 Research Independent Study with their advisor in the fall 



 Bioethics and Science Policy (BIOETHIC)208

semester and two departmental honors seminars, one in the fall semester (AMES 498S [0.5 credit]) and one in the 
spring semester (AMES 499S). Students will have an oral defense of their theses at the end of their final semester. 
In order to graduate with honors, the student must obtain at least an A in the honors seminars.

The Minor
A minor is offered to students interested in the study of language, literature, culture, and history of a 

particular region of Asia and the Middle East. The concentration of the minor is determined by the language of 
study: Arabic, Chinese, Hebrew, Hindi, Japanese, Korean, Persian, or Turkish.

The minor offers two pathways: (1) language pathway and (2) literature and culture pathway. Five courses 
are required in each track.

Minor in Asian & Middle Eastern Studies with a Language Pathway: Five courses are required as 
follows: 1) a minimum of three and up to a maximum of four language courses in one AMES language at the 200 
level or above; 2) a minimum of one and up to a maximum of two AMES literature/culture courses at the 100 level 
or above.

Minor in Asian & Middle Eastern Studies with a Literature and Culture Pathway: Five courses are 
required as follows: (1) two language courses in one AMES language at the 200 level or above; 2) a minimum of 
two and up to a maximum of three AMES literature/culture courses at the 100 level or above. 

Study Abroad. Students who study abroad may transfer up to four language credits, but no literature and 
culture credits, toward the minor in Asian and Middle Eastern studies.

Astronomy
For courses in astronomy, see Physics on page 611.

Biochemistry
For courses in biochemistry, see Medicine (School)—Graduate (School) Basic Science Courses Open to 

Undergraduates (on page 806); also see Biology (on page 209) and Chemistry (on page 226).

Bioethics and Science Policy
Professor Farahany, Director

Bioethics and Science Policy is a master of arts program that offers courses open to qualified upper-level 
students in arts and sciences with the permission of the instructor.

Courses in Bioethics and Science Policy (BIOETHIC)
282. Science, Ethics, & Democracy. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 282
390S. Special Topics. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
502S. Communicating Science & Bioethics. STS One course. C-L: see Science & Society 502S
510S. Science and the Media: Narrative Writing about Science, Health and Policy. STS, W Those 
who write about science, health and related policy must make complex, nuanced ideas understandable to the 
nonscientist in ways that are engaging and entertaining, even if the topic is far outside the reader’s frame of 
reference. Course examines different modes of science writing, the demands of each and considers different 
outlets for publication and their editorial parameters. Students interview practitioners of the craft. Written 
assignments include annotations of readings and original narratives about science and scientists. Course 
considers ways in which narrative writing can inform and affect policy. Prerequisites: a 200-level science course 
and/or permission of the instructor. Instructor: Angrist. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
510S, Public Policy 510S, Documentary Studies
591. Topics in Science Policy. R, STS During this independent research study, students will analyze science 
policy developments across government, including executive and agency actions, as well as proposed legislation 
and judicial decisions. Students will regularly produce policy brief summaries that overview the policy, explain 
the science at issue, present relevant background information, provide context concerning endorsements and 



Bioethics and Science Policy (BIOETHIC) 209

opposition, and expound upon related legislation and governmental actions. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Waitzkin. Variable credit.
601S. Foundations of Bioethics. CZ, EI, STS This course is designed to provide the incoming joint 
degree students in the JD/MA in Bioethics & Science Policy with an introduction to and overview of the central 
concepts underlying bioethics and the formulation of science policy. In a seminar format, the students will 
explore the foundations of bioethics, the concept of informed consent, human subject research and the Common 
Rule, bioethical issues in a clinical setting, risk and the precautionary principle, race and genetics, science and 
human rights, policy analysis, science communication and the formulation of science policy. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Williams. One course.
602S. Law, Research and Bioethics. EI, SS, STS An examination of the relationship between the law 
and bioethical issues, particularly in research and medical contexts. The course will explore the ways scientific 
advances affect law and other social institutions, and, conversely, how law affects the development and use of 
scientific knowledge. Topics include the history of human subject protections, current regulatory and statutory 
issues in research, and legal decisions governing informed consent, confidentiality, privacy, the philosophical 
principles underlying bioethics, and other issues. Consent of instructor is required for undergraduates. 
Instructor: Williams. One course.
603S. Clinical Bioethics and Health Policy. EI An examination of the leading issues in bioethics, 
especially those that arise in the context of clinical decision-making and the doctor-patient encounter. The focus 
will be on the ethical dilemmas faced by medical providers, patients, and their families: how issues are analyzed, 
what values are considered, and how disputes are resolved. Topics will include end-of-life care; withdrawal or 
refusal of life-sustaining treatment; pediatric ethics; transplantation; and rationing of scarce drugs or resources. 
The course will use real case examples to illustrate these dilemmas and challenges. Consent of instructor is 
required for undergraduates. Instructor: Lemmon. One course.
605S. Contemporary Issues in Bioethics and Science Policy. The course will focus on “Professional and 
Scholarly Writing” (Fall; Instructor: Angrist) and “Communicating Science and Bioethics” (Spring; Instructor: 
Weintraub). In the fall, we delve into how and where we express ideas about bioethics and science policy in 
writing. We begin from first principles: Why do we write? What can good writing do for us? How do we know 
when we’re done? During the semester we will write clear, thoughtful, analytic and creative pieces in bioethics 
and science policy. The spring course provides students with practical training in the communication of 
scientific research and bioethical issues to the media, policy makers, and the general public. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Angrist.
606S. Activism and Advocacy Among Patients and Research Participants. CCI, SS, STS, W In 
the 1960s, patients appropriated the language and tactics of the civil rights movement to advance clinical and 
research agendas. In today’s post-genomic and digital information era, patient activism is evolving, leading 
to new solutions, dilemmas, and organizational structures. This course will examine patient and research 
participant activism and the ways it challenges conventional notions of expertise, amateurism, “human subjects 
protections,” and minimization of risk. Students will bring the tools of investigative journalism, humanities 
scholarship, and community engagement/citizen science to bear on ethical and policy questions. Instructor 
consent required for undergraduates. Instructor: Angrist. One course.
607. Introduction to Genetics and Genomics. NS, STS An introduction to the fields of genetics and 
genomics for students without a formal science background. The course begins with an overview of the structure 
and function of DNA and the genome, and an introduction to the lab techniques and technologies used in these 
fields. Students will learn how scientists sequence a genome and how they “map” a disease gene. The course 
will conclude with an examination of the health and societal applications of genetics and genomics. Throughout 
the course, examples of ethical controversies will be provided to give perspective to the science. Consent of 
instructor is required for undergraduates. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Biology
Senior Lecturer Grunwald, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Associate Professor of the Practice Spana, Asso-
ciate Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Alberts, Benfey, Bernhardt, Brandon (Philosophy), Clark 
(Environment); Cunningham, K. Dong, X. Dong, Donohue, Drea (Evolutionary Anthropology), Hartemink (Com-



 Biology (BIOLOGY)210

puter Science), He, Johnsen, Kiehart, Kornbluth, Lutzoni, Manos, McClay, McShea, Mitchell-Olds, Morris, H. Ni-
jhout, M. Noor, Nowacek (Marine Science and Conservation), Nowicki, Patek, Poss (Cell Biology), Pryer, Rausher, 
Rittschof (Marine Science and Conservation), Roth, Shaw, Schmidt (Physics), D. Sherwood, Silliman (Marine 
Science and Conservation), Smith, Sun, Uyenoyama, Vilgalys, Willis, Wray, and Yoder; Associate Professors 
Baugh, Bejsovec, Haase, Hunt (Marine Science and Conservation), Johnson (Marine Science and Conservation), 
Magwene, Pei, Royal (African & African American Studies), Schmid, Strader, Tung (Evolutionary Anthropology), 
Volkan, Wilson, and Wright; Assistant Professors Gibert, Goldberg (Evolutionary Anthropology), Monteiro Silva, 
and Onishi; Professors Emeriti Barber, Forward, Klopfer, Nicklas, Searles, Siedow, Staddon, Strain, Terborgh, 
Tucker, White, and Wilbur; Professor of the Practice Mercer; Associate Professors of the Practice, Broverman, J. 
A. Reynolds, N. Sherwood, and Spana; Senior Lecturers Grunwald and Hill; Lecturer Perz

A major and a minor are available in this department.
The biology major and minor and biology courses in a variety of areas are offered by the Department of 

Biology. Additional courses in the biological sciences are offered by the departments of evolutionary anthropology, 
chemistry, and psychology in Trinity College of Arts & Sciences; by the basic sciences departments in the School of 
Medicine; and by the Pratt School of Engineering and the Nicholas School of the Environment.

Courses in Biology (BIOLOGY)
20. General Biology. Pre-matriculation credit awarded for a score of 4 on the College Board AP Examination 
(or the equivalent). One course.
21. General Biology. Pre-matriculation credit awarded for a score of 5 on the College Board AP Examination 
(or the equivalent). Students may place into Biology 203L. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
128FS. Evolutionary Genomics: Who Are We, Where Have We Been, and Where Are We Going?. 
NS, STS One course. C-L: see Genome Sciences and Policy 128FS
148FS. Genomics of Host-Microbe Interactions: The Symbiotic Web. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: 
see Environment 148FS; also C-L: Genome Sciences and Policy 148FS
153. Climate, Coffee, and Coronavirus: Why Ecology Matters to Human Health. EI, NS, STS This 
course explores interactions between organisms and their environments that impact human health. We will 
examine the effects of climate change and human population growth on our food supply, water availability, the 
spread of disease, and ecosystem services. Case studies will be used to illustrate the scientific process, to evaluate 
supporting evidence, and to investigate ethical issues. For nonmajors. One course. Not open to students who 
have taken Biology 209-1 or Biology 209S-1. Instructor: Reynolds. One course. C-L: Environment 153, Global 
Health 153, Global Health
154. AIDS and Other Emerging Diseases. NS, STS Explores the interaction of biology and culture in 
creating and defining diseases through an investigation of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) and 
other emerging diseases: molecular biology; biology of transmission and infection; the role of people and culture 
in the evolution of infectious diseases; reasons for the geographic variations in disease. The inductive-deductive 
methodology of science is both used to develop and test hypotheses as well as examined itself as an analytical 
tool. Intended for nonmajors. Instructor: Broverman. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 103, 
Global Health 154, Global Health
157. The Dynamic Oceans. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 102; also C-L: Marine 
Science and Conservation
158. Plants and Human Use. NS, STS Historical and present interactions between humans and plants 
like coffee, tea, sugar, opium, pepper, potato and hemp, illustrating major changes in human civilization and 
cultures as a result. Social economic, trade, exploration, spiritual, medicinal, and plant structural and chemical 
reasons underlying the pivotal roles certain plant species have played in the development of human culture 
and technology. Case studies of different plant commodities (products) revealing these biological and historical 
interactions. For nonmajors. Instructor: Pryer. One course.
175LA. Marine Biology. EI, NS, STS Physical and chemical aspects of estuarine and marine ecosystems and 
environments. Functional adaptations of marine organisms and the role of man and society on the ecosystems. 
Includes field trips to local environments with an emphasis on impacted environments and their relation to 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 211

societal activity and policy. For students not majoring in natural sciences. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 175LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
180FS. Global Diseases. NS, STS Biological, social, and cultural factors impacting global disease spread 
and/or reduction; current challenges in vaccination and disease control programs. Open only to students in the 
Focus Program. One course. C-L: Global Health
190. Special Topics in Biology. Special topics in Biology, intended for non-majors. Topics vary by term. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Biology. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Topics in Biology. Open only to students in the Focus Program; for first-year 
students with consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Topics in Modern Biology. Occasional seminars in various topics in biology. Intended for nonmajors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
201D. Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology. NS, STS Non-laboratory version of Biology 201L. 
Introduces major concepts in biology through the lens of molecular biology. Molecular mechanisms that 
comprise the Central Dogma and variants. DNA structure and function, replication, transcription, and 
translation. Protein synthesis, folding, structure and function. Supporting topics related to the structure of cells, 
metabolism and energetics. Integration of physical and quantitative principles to molecular biology. Relevance 
to human diseases and the biotechnology industry. Prerequisite: Chemistry 21, 21L, 101DL, 110DL, or 201DL. 
Not open to students who have taken Biology 201L/201LA. Taught online. Instructor: Hill, Armaleo. One course.
201L. Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology. NS, STS Introduces major concepts in biology through 
the lens of molecular biology. Molecular mechanisms that comprise the Central Dogma and variants. DNA 
structure and function, replication, transcription, and translation. Protein synthesis, folding, structure and 
function. Supporting topics related to the structure of cells, metabolism and energetics. Integration of physical 
and quantitative principles to molecular biology. Relevance to human diseases and the biotechnology industry. 
Laboratory includes an introduction to recombinant DNA technology. Prerequisite: Chemistry 21, 21L, 101DL, 
110DL, or 201DL. Not open to students who have taken or are currently enrolled in Biology 203L. Instructor: 
Baugh, Hill, Schmid, and/or Silva. One course.
201LA. Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology. NS, STS Introduces major concepts in biology through 
the lens of molecular biology. Molecular mechanisms that comprise the Central Dogma and variants. DNA 
structure and function, replication, transcription, and translation. Protein synthesis, folding, structure and 
function. Supporting topics related to the structure of cells, metabolism and energetics. Integration of physical 
and quantitative principles to molecular biology. Relevance to human diseases and the biotechnology industry. 
Laboratory includes an introduction to recombinant DNA technology. Prerequisite: Chemistry 21, 21L, 101DL, 
110DL, or 201DL. Not open to students who have taken or are currently enrolled in Biology 203L. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Schultz. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
202L. Gateway to Biology: Genetics and Evolution. NS, STS Introduction to principles transmission 
genetics and evolution. Includes Mendelian and non-Mendelian inheritance, quantitative genetics, genetic 
mapping, evidence for evolution, natural selection, genetic drift, kin selection, speciation, molecular evolution, 
phylogenetic analysis. Relevance to human family and social structure, evolution of infectious disease, human 
hereditary disorders, social implications of genetic knowledge. Not open to students who have taken or are 
currently enrolled in Biology 203L. Instructor: Bejsovec, Tung, Willis, Yoder, or staff. One course.
202LA. Gateway to Biology: Genetics and Evolution. NS, STS Introduction to principles transmission 
genetics and evolution. Includes Mendelian and non-Mendelian inheritance, quantitative genetics, genetic 
mapping, evidence for evolution, natural selection, genetic drift, kin selection, speciation, molecular evolution, 
phylogenetic analysis. Relevance to human family and social structure, evolution of infectious disease, human 
hereditary disorders, social implications of genetic knowledge. Not open to students who have taken or are 
currently enrolled in Biology 203L. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Schultz. One course. 
C-L: Marine Sciences
203L. Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology, Genetics & Evolution. NS, STS Major concepts in 
modern biology through the lens of molecular biology, genetics and evolution. The structure and function 



 Biology (BIOLOGY)212

of genes at the molecular, organismal, and population level. Molecular mechanisms including replication, 
transcription, translation, and DNA mutation and repair. Mendelian and non-Mendelian inheritance, genetic 
mapping, evidence for evolution, natural selection, genetic drift, speciation, molecular evolution, phylogenetic 
analysis. Relevance to human diseases, social implications of genetics and biotechnology. Prerequisite: Biology 
21 and Chemistry 21, 21L, 101DL, 110DL, or 201DL. Not open to students who have taken or are currently 
enrolled in Biology 201L or 202L. Instructor: Wray, Rausher, Spana. One course.
205. Marine Megafauna. NS, STS Ecology, systematics, and behavior of large marine animals including 
giant squid, bony fishes, sharks, sea turtles, seabirds, and marine mammals. Relations between ocean dynamics, 
large marine animals, and their role in ocean food webs. Impact of human activities and technological 
advancement on populations. Economic, social, and policy considerations in the protection of threatened 
species. Prerequisite: AP Biology, Introductory Biology, or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Environment 205, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
207. Organismal Evolution. NS Exploration of the diversity of life by emphasizing evolutionary, structural, 
and functional aspects of the major lineages of bacteria, plants, protists, animals and fungi. Not open to students 
who have taken Biology 206L. Instructor: Manos and Cunningham. One course.
208FS. Computing on the Genome: An Introduction to Genomics and Bioinformatics. NS, 
QS This course will provide an introduction to key concepts in the genome sciences, using tools and concepts 
from computational biology and bioinformatics. Topics to be covered include genome structure, function, 
variation, and evolution. Students will learn computational and statistical methods for describing and 
quantifying various aspects of genome biology and will apply these tools to real world data. Recommended 
prerequisite: familiarity with molecular biology concepts such as DNA replication, transcription, and 
translation. No prior programming experience is required. Open only to Focus Program students. Instructor: 
Magwene. One course.
209-1. The Ecology of Human Health. NS, STS Humans are the dominant species on Earth and ecology 
is key to understanding the multiple feedbacks through which their activities affect human health. Fundamental 
principles of ecology, from population to ecosystem levels, will be examined through the lens of human health. 
Topics include human population growth and carrying capacity, why we age, infectious disease dynamics, the 
microbiome and human health, sustainable agriculture and food security, sustainable harvest of wild foods, 
dynamics of pollutants in food webs, ecosystem services to humans, and human impacts of climate change. 
Not open to students who have taken Biology 209 or Biology 209D-2. Instructor: Morris and/or Reynolds. One 
course.
209D-2. Ecology for a Crowded Planet. NS, STS Human activities are fundamentally altering our 
landscapes and our atmosphere. The science of ecology is central to our ability to sustain populations of 
organisms, regional and global biodiversity, and the provision of critical ecosystem services. Course emphasizes 
critical analysis of ecological data and the design and interpretation of ecological experiments and models. 
Students will become well equipped to evaluate environmental science as it is reported in the popular press. Not 
open to students who have credit for Biology 209 or 209-1. Instructor: Bernhardt, Gibert, and/or Wright. One 
course.
209S-1. The Ecology of Human Health. NS, STS, W Humans are the dominant species on Earth and 
ecology is key to understanding the multiple feedbacks through which their activities affect human health. 
Fundamental principles of ecology, from population to ecosystem levels, will be examined through the lens of 
human health. Topics include human population growth and carrying capacity, why we age, infectious disease 
dynamics, the microbiome and human health, sustainable agriculture and food security, sustainable harvest of 
wild foods, dynamics of pollutants in food webs, ecosystem services to humans, and human impacts of climate 
change. Not open to students who have taken Biology 209-1 or 209D-2. Instructor: Reynolds. One course.
212L. General Microbiology. NS Classical and modern approaches to the study of microorganisms and their 
roles/applications in everyday life, medicine, research, and the environment. Microbial cell structure, function, 
growth, genetics, metabolism, evolution, and ecology. Study of disease, infection, and immunology. Introduction 
to virology. Recommended for many pre-health programs. Prerequisite: one course in a biological science or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Dong, Lutzoni, and/or Schmid. One course. C-L: Global Health
213D. Cell Signaling and Diseases. NS During the past several decades, exploration in basic research 
has yielded extensive knowledge about the numerous and intricate signaling processes involved in the 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 213

development and maintenance of a functional organism. In order to demonstrate the importance and processes 
of cellular communication, this course will focus on cell signaling mechanisms and diseases resulting from 
their malfunction, such as cancer, stroke, and neuron degeneration (including Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s 
disease, Huntington’s disease, and Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). Students will be exposed to current literature 
and cutting edge knowledge. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L. Instructor: Pei and Sun. One 
course.
215. Introduction to Mathematical Modeling in Biology. NS, QS, R A first course applying 
mathematics to biological problems. Topics drawn from cell and molecular biology, molecular evolution, 
enzyme catalysis, biochemical pathways, ecology, systems biology, and developmental biology. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 212 or equivalent. Instructor: Mercer. One course.
218. Biological Clocks: How Organisms Keep Time. NS From sleep/wake cycles to flower opening to cell 
division and malaria infections; all organisms and cells display rhythmic behaviors. Course will focus on genetic 
and molecular networks that comprise clocks regulating cell division and circadian rhythms. Quantitative 
aspects clock networks will be examined from the perspective of data analysis and dynamical models. Class will 
include lectures, primary literature readings, and in-class projects. Recommended prerequisite: Math 112L or 
equivalent, and Biology 20, 21, 201L, or 203L. Instructor: Haase and staff. One course.
220. Cell Biology. NS The role of genes and proteins in mediating basic cellular processes. Topics include: 
structure and function of cellular membranes and organelles; protein targeting and transport; signal 
transduction; role of the cytoskeleton in cell shape and motility; function of the immune system; genetic 
regulation of cell growth/division and the relationship to cancer. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 
203L. Instructor: McClay, D. Sherwood, or staff. One course.
221D. Developmental Biology: Development, Stem Cells, and Regeneration. NS Mechanisms of 
fertilization, control of cell divisions, diversification of cell types, organization and differentiation of cells and 
tissues of the organism, and patterning necessary to establish the body plan of many organisms including 
vertebrates, invertebrates and plants. Included among these mechanisms are the roles of transcription factors 
in controlling the trajectories toward tissues, signal transduction, morphogenetic movements, and other 
mechanisms used by different plants and animals to build a functional adult. Also includes stem cell biology, 
regeneration of tissues, sex determination, and evolutionary mechanisms of diversification. Recommended 
prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L or equivalent. Instructor: McClay. One course.
223. Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 223
224. Fundamentals of Neuroscience. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 201; also C-L: 
Psychology 275
228. Food and Fuel for a Growing Population: Nuts and Bolts of Plant Growth and Production. 
NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 228
228S. Food and Fuel for a Growing Population: Nuts and Bolts of Plant Growth and Production. 
NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 228S
251L. Molecular Evolution. NS, QS, R Evolution of genes, gene families, and genomes and relation to their 
structure, function and history. Contemporary computer-based analysis of nucleic acid and protein evolution 
including: BLAST searches; sequence alignment; estimation of rates, patterns, types of substitution; interpreting 
evolutionary changes in structure-function relations; protein homology modeling; visualizing and annotating 
protein structure. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L, 203L, or consent of the instructor. Instructor: 
Mercer. One course. C-L: Science & Society
255. Philosophy of Biology. CZ, NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 314; also C-L: Science & 
Society, Marine Science and Conservation
260S. Genetics and Genomics of Human Variation. CCI, NS, STS Research over the last 50 years has 
demonstrated that the human species is characterized by low genetic diversity and extensive recombination. 
Yet, social constructions of ‘race’ based on phenotypic differences are ingrained in our understanding of how 
humans vary. This course will uncover how the human species varies at the genetic and genomic levels, in the 
context of other primate species. Given this background, we will discuss the social construction of ‘race’ and the 
intersection of macroevolution, genetics, and phenotype. Finally, we will explore current research that suggests 



 Biology (BIOLOGY)214

a genetic or epigenetic basis for perceived racial health disparities and outcomes in biomedicine. Open only to 
Duke Immerse students. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Gosselin-Ildari and Lutzoni. One course. C-L: 
Evolutionary Anthropology 215S
261D. Race, Genomics, and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 261D; also C-L: Science & Society 258D, Global Health 258D, Cultural Anthropology 261D, Visual and 
Media Studies 274D
262. People, Plants and Pollution: Introduction to Urban Environments. NS, STS Cities turn 
natural lands into impervious surfaces, like roofs and parking lots, while trees, forests, and grass decrease. 
Course covers urban environmental issues, including energy and carbon, air, heat, and water pollution, the 
health and welfare of people, and changes in other species and regional/global climatic patterns. Examines 
costs/benefits of urban nature on solving urban environmental problems, including enhancing the social welfare 
of people’s lives. Instructor: Wilson. One course. C-L: Environment 274
263. Biological Responses to Climate Change. NS, W Lecture/discussion course on how organisms, 
populations, and biological communities are expected to respond to climate change. Topics include evidence 
for effects of climate change on organisms, how to experimentally test for potential effects of climate change, 
ecological and evolutionary mechanisms that organisms have—or do not have—that enable them to respond to 
climate change, community responses to climate change. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 202L or 203L. 
Instructor: Donohue. One course.
267D. Behavioral Ecology and the Evolution of Animal Behavior. NS, R, STS, W How animal 
behavior is shaped by natural selection, historical factors, and ecological constraints. These factors considered 
in the context of mating systems, parental care, foraging, and other current issues in behavior. Recommended 
prerequisite: Biology 202L or 203L. Instructor: Alberts. One course. C-L: Evolutionary Anthropology 347D
267D-1. Behavioral Ecology and the Evolution of Animal Behavior. NS, STS How animal behavior 
is shaped by natural selection, historical factors, and ecological constraints. These factors considered in the 
context of mating systems, parental care, foraging, and other current issues in behavior. Does not carry codes for 
research- (R) or writing- (W) intensive course. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 202L or 203L. Instructor: 
Alberts. One course. C-L: Evolutionary Anthropology 347D-1
268D. Mechanisms of Animal Behavior. NS Survey of causal factors underlying the expression of 
animal behavior, organized around common problems organisms need to solve, such as finding food, avoiding 
predation, determining when and with whom to reproduce, communicating with other organisms, and 
extracting information from the environment. These factors are examined from an integrative perspective that 
includes neurobiology, endocrinology, sensory physiology, genetics, developmental biology, and functional 
morphology. Prerequisite: Biology 202L, 202LA, or 203L. Instructor: Nowicki. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 
268D
270A. Conservation Biology and Policy. EI, NS, STS, W Introduction to the key concepts of ecology 
and policy relevant to conservation issues at the population to ecosystems level. Focus on the origin and 
maintenance of biodiversity and conservation applications from both the biology and policy perspectives (for 
example, endangered species, captive breeding, reserve design, habitat fragmentation, ecosystem restoration/
rehabilitation). Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: introductory biology; suggested: a policy 
and/or introductory ecology course. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 270A, Marine Sciences, 
Marine Science and Conservation
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems. NS The history, utility, and heuristic value of the ecosystem; ocean 
systems in the context of Odum’s ecosystem concept; structure and function of the earth’s major ecosystems. 
Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: one year of biology, one year of chemistry, or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Johnson. One course. C-L: Environment 272A, Earth and Ocean Sciences 272A, Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
273LA. Marine Ecology. NS, R, W Distribution, abundance, and diversity of marine organisms, including 
a survey of the major flora and fauna in the marine environment, including physical characteristics, adaptation 
to environment, species interactions, biogeography, larval recruitment, and biodiversity and conservation of 
communities found in rocky shores, tidal flats, beaches, marshes, mangrove, coral reefs, and subtidal areas. 
Lectures, field excursions, lab exercises and an independent project. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 215

Taught fall, spring, and summer; spring enrollment requires travel. Recommended prerequisite: AP biology 
or introductory biology. Instructor: Silliman. One course. C-L: Environment 273LA, Earth and Ocean Sciences 
374LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
275A. Biology for Engineers: Informing Engineering Decisions. NS, STS Biology from an engineering 
perspective. Emphasis on biological processes that inform engineering decisions. Topics include: environmental 
chemicals, biological command and control, nanostructures, e-waste, biology and engineered materials, 
organotoxins, metaltoxins, nanotoxins, biofouling, biomemetics, biological glues, biocorrosion, biodegradation, 
bioremediation, biological resistance, and biological virulence. Environmental and human health policy. Taught 
in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: introductory chemistry. Instructor: Rittschof. One course. C-L: 
Environment 271A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
278LA. Comparative Physiology of Marine Animals. NS, R, W Physiology of marine animals with 
emphasis on comparisons between marine vertebrates and humans. Focus on physiological processes including 
gas exchange, circulation, osmoregulation, metabolism, thermoregulation, endocrine, neural control and 
sensory systems. Lectures and laboratories illustrate the methodology, analysis techniques, and written 
reporting of physiological research. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Taught fall, spring, and summer. 
Prerequisite: AP biology, introductory biology, or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Wise or staff. One course. 
C-L: Environment 278LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
279LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 280LA; also C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 384LA, Earth and Ocean Sciences 280LA, 
University Program in Marine Science, Marine Science-Natural Science
287A. Biodiversity of Alaska. NS, STS Ecology/biodiversity and conservation in Alaska: identification 
and natural history of native plants and animals including both terrestrial and marine species, biogeographic 
history and patterns, native American cultures, conservation issues surrounding Alaskan natural resources. 
Regional, national, and geopolitical issues surrounding development and conservation in Alaska and elsewhere 
in the arctic. Lectures and discussions complemented by field trips to examine terrestrial, aquatic, and marine 
ecosystems across the three major Alaskan biomes: coastal rainforest, boreal coniferous forest, arctic/alpine. 
Taught in Alaska. Instructor: Shaw. One course. C-L: Environment 277A, Earth and Ocean Sciences 287A
288A. Biogeography in an Australian Context. NS, STS Distribution of plants and animals in space 
and time as determined by the interaction of geophysics, geology, climate, and evolutionary history. Special 
emphasis on the unique terrestrial and marine faunas and floras of the Australian continent and on the impact 
of humans on the distribution of these plants and animals. Taught in Australia. Instructor: Glass. One course. 
C-L: Environment 288A, Earth and Ocean Sciences 288A
290. Topics in Biology. Occasional topics in the biological sciences. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Seminar in Biology. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290T. Tutorial. Tutorial under supervision of a faculty member for two or more students working on a related 
topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to all qualified students with consent 
of supervising instructor and director of undergraduate studies. May be repeated. Continued in Biology 493. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
293-1. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, under 
the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to all qualified students with consent of 
supervising instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
293A. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member the major product of which is a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. May be repeated. Continued in Biology 
493A. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine 



 Biology (BIOLOGY)216

Science and Conservation
293A-1. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, 
under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to all qualified students with consent 
of supervising instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
304. Biological Data Analysis. NS, QS Principles and applications of statistics in biology, with emphasis 
on genetics, molecular biology, ecology, and evolution. Topics include: the visualization presentation of 
biological data, summary statistics, probabilities and commonly-applied probability distributions, the central 
limit theorem, statistical hypothesis tests, errors and power, tests using the z- and t-distributions, correlation 
and regression, analyses of variance, non-parametric tests, and reproducible analysis using the R statistical 
computing environment. Not open to students who have credit for another 100-level statistics course. 
Instructor: Magwene or Mitchell-Olds. One course.
308A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health. CCI, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 
308A; also C-L: Global Health 308A
309A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 309A; 
also C-L: Global Health 309A, Marine Sciences
310. Primate Evolutionary Genetics. NS, R One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 310
311. Systems Biology: An Introduction for the Quantitative Sciences. NS Introduction to concepts 
and applications of Systems Biology. Identification of molecular interactions that underlie cellular function 
using high dimension data acquired through high-throughput approaches. Intended for students with prior 
training in quantitative fields (computer science, math, physics, statistics, engineering). Instructor: Magwene 
and Schmid. One course. C-L: Science & Society
318. Human Evolutionary Genetics. NS, R One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 318
319A. Coastal Watershed Science and Policy. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 321A; also C-L: 
Marine Sciences
321. Primate Sexuality. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 341
321D. Primate Sexuality. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 341D
322. From Neurons to Brain. NS Physiology of single neurons, and how they come together to form a 
circuit. Ideas about how circuits encode information. Operation of neural circuits, and experimental and 
theoretical approaches to unravel them. Principles underlying sensory, motor and decision-making circuits. A 
range of model systems from small (leech, stomatogastric ganglia) to medium (fruitflies and bees) and large 
(songbirds, mice, primates) will be introduced. Design principles and constraints that have shaped the nervous 
system during evolution will be discussed. Prerequisite: Biology 201L and Chemistry 101DL or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 322
325. Current Technologies in Genomics and Precision Medicine. NS, STS Comprehensive overview 
of genome science technologies, analytical tools, clinical applications, and related issues. Exposure to a range 
of technologies currently used in research and some in clinical practice, as well as the tools to interrogate the 
large data-sets generated by these technologies. Projects will explore the range of datasets publicly available and 
analysis of genomic datasets. Prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L. Instructor: Haga and Wray. One course. C-L: 
Molecular Genetics & Microbiology 325
326S. Evolutionary Genomics. NS, STS The unification of genomic data, bioinformatic analysis, and 
evolutionary theory has transformed our understanding of human history, our place within the Tree of Life, 
and the impact that our species is having on those with whom we share the planet. This course will draw from 
the primary literature to familiarize students with the multifaceted power of genomics, with a slant towards 
examining human history and disease from an evolutionary perspective. Readings will be drawn from a wide 
variety of sources, from some published more than a century ago, up through the contemporary popular press. 
Recommended prerequisite: Biology 202L. Instructor: Yoder. One course.
329D. Principles of Animal Physiology. NS Non-laboratory version of Biology 329L. Does not carry the R 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 217

or W curricular designations. Not open to students who have taken Biology 329L. Recommended prerequisite: 
Biology 20, 21, 201L or 203L and Physics 141L and Chemistry 101DL. Instructor: Grunwald. One course.
329L. Principles of Animal Physiology. NS, R, W Examination of physiological principles that guide 
animal life processes. Framed in an evolutionary context, processes including respiration, circulation, neural 
control, movement, excretion and metabolism will be understood in terms of core principles that also apply 
to humans. Laboratories will include directed and self-directed investigations into animal physiology using 
research grade data acquisition systems. This is a writing-intensive course. Not open to students who have 
taken Biology 329D. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 21, 201L or 203L and Physics 141L and Chemistry 
101DL. Instructor: Patek. One course.
330L. Comparative and Functional Anatomy of the Vertebrates. NS The structure, function and 
evolution of the vertebrate body. Emphasis on understanding the functional, evolutionary and developmental 
basis for the similarities and difference observed among living vertebrates. Laboratories examining specific 
problems in the evolution of major organ systems through dissection, comparison and analysis of functional 
data. Instructor: Staff. One course.
335A. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation. NS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 335A; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
335LA. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation. NS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 335LA; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
341L. Plant Communities of North Carolina. NS Overview of plant communities in the mountains, 
piedmont, and coastal plain of North Carolina, primarily through field trips. The dominant native plants of each 
community; the biology and identification of important invasive species. Required weekend field trip to the 
mountains, and several weekend day trips. Instructor: Manos. One course.
342L. Plant Systematics and Evolution. NS, STS Plants as providers of food, shelter, and medicine and as 
one of evolution’s great success stories. Phylogenetic principles and methods of analysis used to recognize major 
families of vascular plants. Flowering plants and the evolution of floral form and function, pollination, and 
breeding systems. Sources of taxonomic evidence including morphology, anatomy, and DNA. Both traditional 
and modern identification tools. The interdisciplinary nature of plant systematics and its importance in modern 
society. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 21, 202L, or 203L. Field trips. Instructor: Pryer and Windham. 
One course.
344S. Plant Diversity: A Field Approach. NS Field-based study of plant diversity. Collection, 
identification, and ecology of plant species in a specific forested location. Biodiversity informatics, plant 
evolution, and ecology. Instructor: Shaw. One course. C-L: Environment 344S
345. Dinosaurs with Feathers and Whales with Legs: Major Evolutionary Transitions in the 
Fossil Record. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 341
346. Symbiosis: From Organelles to Microbiomes. NS, R, STS Symbiotic interactions are integral 
to the biology of multicellular eukaryotes. The discovery of the roles of the human microbiome in the 
development, physiology, ecology and evolution of humans is currently transforming medicine. This course is a 
multidisciplinary study, at the intersection of evolutionary biology, ecology and genomics, of symbiotic systems 
such as plant-animal, microbe-plant, and microbe-animal symbioses spanning the entire tree of life, including 
the human microbiome. We explore this topic from a researcher’s perspective and with the goal of helping 
students join research labs. Instructor: Lutzoni. One course.
347L. Plants and People. NS, STS The history of humans is deeply intertwined with plants. We depend 
on them for food, fuel, beverages, medicine, textiles, shelter, and trade. This course explores the evolutionary 
diversity of plants across the Green Tree of Life and their importance to people through time, the history of their 
domestication, their current roles in our society, and in our ecosystems. Includes laboratory investigations and 
scheduled field trips. Instructor: Pryer and Windham. One course.
348LS. Herpetology. NS Introduction to diversity and biology of amphibians and non-avian reptiles. 
Emphases on their evolutionary history, including the relationships among the major taxonomic groups and 
to other taxa. Topics include evolutionary adaptations with regard to life history, physiology, behavior. Human 
interactions and species conservation. Examples from North Carolina and the Southeastern US will be used 



 Biology (BIOLOGY)218

whenever possible. Laboratory activities, field projects, required and optional field trips. Instructor: Grunwald. 
One course.
350. Complex Traits and Evolutionary Genetics. NS Introduction to the principles of evolutionary 
genetics and variation of complex phenotypic traits. Genetic variation, neutral theory, natural selection, 
quantitative genetics, human population genetics, phylogenetic reconstruction, evolutionary genomics, and 
evolutionary bioinformatics. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 21, 202L, or 203L. Instructor: Mitchell-
Olds. One course. C-L: Science & Society
361LS. Field Ecology. NS, R, W Explore the natural systems of North Carolina through hands-on 
experimentation. Through student-guided inquiry and field experimentation students will gain experience in 
formulating hypotheses, designing field observations and experiments, analyzing field data and interpreting 
results from the fields of ecosystem, community, population, and physiological ecology. In addition to weekly 
field labs, the course will include a weekend field trip. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20 or 21 or one 
course in ecology or consent of instructor; Mathematics 111L. Instructor: Wright or Bernhardt. One course. C-L: 
Environment 361LS
364L. Advanced Experimental Physics. NS Half course. C-L: see Physics 364L
365L. Advanced Experimental Physics. NS One course. C-L: see Physics 365L
368A. Deep-Sea Science and Environmental Management. NS, R, STS Explores ecosystems in the 
deep sea, including fundamental aspects of geology, chemistry, and biodiversity; behavioral, physiological, 
and biochemical adaptations of organisms (primarily invertebrate, but may include microbial and vertebrate 
components) to deep-sea benthic and bentho-pelagic environments will be introduced. Students will gain 
an understanding of the ecosystem services of the deep sea; issues in deep-sea environmental management 
arising from exploitation of deep-sea resources will be discussed. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Recommended prerequisite: introductory biology (Biology 20,21, 202L, or 203L or equivalent). Instructor: Van 
Dover. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
369LA. Biological Oceanography. NS, R Discusses patterns of abundance, diversity and activity of 
organisms in major ocean ecosystems. Identifies major physical, chemical and ecological processes that 
affect these patterns, and analyzes impact of biology on ecosystems. Uses a “flipped” classroom for enhanced 
development of quantitative skills to measure these patterns, emphasizing hands-on data collection and 
analyses, multiple field trips aboard DUML research vessels, and participatory activities to demonstrate core 
concepts in biological oceanography. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Spring enrollment requires 
travel. Recommended prerequisite: AP biology or introductory biology. Instructor: Johnson. One course. C-L: 
Environment 369LA, Earth and Ocean Sciences 273LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
373LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals. NS, R, W Sensory physiological 
principles with emphasis on visual and chemical cues. Laboratories will use behavior to measure physiological 
processes. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: AP Biology or introductory biology or consent 
of instructor and Chemistry 101DL. Instructor: Rittschof. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 381LA, Environment 
373LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
375A. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles. NS, STS Essential biology of sea turtles (evolution, 
anatomy, physiology, behavior, life history, population dynamics) and their conservation needs; emphasis on 
their role in marine ecosystem structure and function. Basic ecological concepts integrated with related topics 
including the conservation and management of endangered species, the contributions of technology to the 
management of migratory marine species, the role of research in national and international law and policy, 
and the veterinary aspects of conservation. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Field trip to Puerto Rico 
required. Prerequisite: introductory biology. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Godfrey or Staff. One 
course. C-L: Environment 375A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
375LA. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles. NS, STS Laboratory version of Biology 375A. Includes 
laboratory and field experience with animals and with their habitat requirements. Taught in Beaufort at Duke 
Marine Lab. Prerequisite: introductory biology. Instructor: Godfrey or Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 
375LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
376A. Marine Mammals. NS, STS The biology of cetaceans, pinnipeds, sirenians, and sea otters. Topics 
covered include the diversity, evolution, ecology, and behavior of marine mammals and their interactions with 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 219

humans. Detailed consideration given to the adaptations that allow these mammals to live in the sea. Evaluation 
of the scientific, ethical, and aesthetic factors influencing societal attitudes toward these animals and of their 
conservation management in light of domestic legislation and international treaties. Taught in Beaufort at Duke 
Marine Lab. Prerequisite: introductory biology. Instructor: Read. One course. C-L: Environment 376A, Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
376LA. Marine Mammals. NS, R, STS Laboratory version of Biology 376A. Laboratory and field exercises 
consider social organization, behavior, ecology, communication, and anatomy of local bottlenose dolphins. 
Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: introductory biology. Instructor: Read. One course. C-L: 
Environment 376LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates. NS, R An introduction to the biodiversity represented 
by major marine invertebrate groups, with emphasis on the diversity of body forms and behaviors and on 
anatomical structures and functions. Field trips primarily by boat allow students to explore invertebrates 
characteristic of a variety of coastal habitats in North Carolina, including mud flats, sandy beaches, salt marshes, 
oyster reefs, piers and docks, and the water column. Live invertebrates maintained in the laboratory serve as 
models for detailed study of form and function. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Van Dover, 
Silliman. One course. C-L: Environment 377LA, Earth and Ocean Sciences 377LA, Marine Sciences, Marine 
Science and Conservation
380LA. Marine Molecular Microbiology. NS One course. C-L: see Environment 383LA; also C-L: Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
384A. Marine Conservation Biology - a Practicum. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 384A; 
also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
385L. Integrative Neuroscience Laboratory. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 385L
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Biology. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study: Advanced Topics. Reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of 
a Biology faculty member. Intended for students interested in studying topics not offered in regularly available 
courses. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391A. Independent Study: Advanced Topics. Reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of 
a Biology faculty member. Intended for students interested in studying topics not offered in regularly available 
courses. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
412S. Sensory Signal Transduction. NS, R Recent progress in sensory signal transduction mediated by 
calcium channels and receptors. Topics include history and techniques in the study of ion channels, such as 
electrophysiology, calcium imaging, and cell and molecular biology; cell surface perception for external signals, 
including light receptors, olfactory receptors, taste receptors, hot and cold receptors, and mechanical receptors; 
heart and brain pacemakers; sensory channel receptor-related human diseases; and plan sensory signaling 
network. Instructor: Pei. One course.
414LS. Experiments in Developmental and Molecular Genetics. NS, R Experimental 
approaches in development and genetics using animal and plant models. Laboratory training in molecular 
genetics, immunochemistry, microscopy, protein chemistry, and genetic screening. Experiments include 
immunochemical localization, in situ hybridization, polymerase chain reaction, genetic screening, embryo 
micromanipulation, microscopic imaging, and mutant analysis. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L, 
202L, or 203L, prior or concurrent registration in Biology 220. Instructor: Spana. One course.
415S. Developmental and Stem Cell Biology Colloquium. NS Lectures, seminars, and discussion of 
current topics in developmental biology. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L, 202L or 203L and/or 220 
or equivalent. Instructor: D. Sherwood. One course.
416L. Experimenting With, and Writing About, Molecules and Cells. NS, R, W Experiments, 
analysis, and writing in the field of molecular biology. Investigate hands-on protein-DNA binding, protein 
domain structure and function, differential gene expression, protein localization. Utilize techniques including 
genetic transformation, gel mobility shift assays, Western and Northern blotting, PCR, RT-PCR, microarrays, 
immunolocalization, DNA sequencing. Learn how to evaluate procedures and results and to organize them into 



 Biology (BIOLOGY)220

clear, publication-quality scientific papers. Especially helpful for students who wish to maximize the benefits of 
subsequent or concurrent independent study experiences. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L. 
Instructor: Armaleo. One course.
417S. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology. NS, STS Applications of recombinant DNA in 
medicine and in agriculture. Topics include diagnosis of genetic diseases, gene therapy, drugs for AIDS and 
cancer, DNA fingerprinting, cloning of mammals, phytoremediation, crop improvement, and pharmaceutical 
protein production in transgenic plants and animals. Social and environmental impacts of biotechnology. 
Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L, 203L, or 220, or lab experience or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Sun. One course. C-L: Science & Society 417S
418. Introduction to Biophysics. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Physics 414
420. Cancer Genetics. NS, R Overview of the genetic changes associated with cancer and the molecular 
events that transform normal cellular processes into tumor-promoting conditions. Topics include: tumor 
viruses, oncogenes, growth factors, signal transduction pathways, tumor suppressors, cell cycle control, 
apoptosis, genome instability, stem cells, metastasis, and current therapeutic approaches. Prerequisite: (Biology 
201L/201LA and Biology 202L/202LA) or Biology 203L. Instructor: Bejsovec. One course.
421S. Biology of Nervous System Diseases. NS Primary literature investigating the underlying molecular 
and cellular mechanisms of nervous system disorders such as neurodegenerative diseases (Alzheimer’s, 
Parkinson’s, Huntington’s), mental illness, and epilepsy. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 201 or 223 or Biology 220 
or consent of instructor. Instructor: Sherwood, Nina. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 421S, Psychology 477S
422LS. Experiments in Animal Models of Human Neurodegenerative Disease. NS, R This course 
will bring students into a basic research setting to directly contribute to our understanding of the molecular 
and cellular underpinnings of neurodegenerative disease. Classic experimental approaches in the lab (fruit 
fly genetics, molecular techniques, dissection, immunocytochemistry, microscopy) will be paired with short 
lectures, literature-based discussions, and data presentations. Students should, through firsthand experience, 
gain an appreciation for 1) the life cycle of basic research, 2) the utility, challenges, and caveats of various 
approaches to understanding disease, and 3) the elegance and relevance of gene and cell function across 
organisms. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L. Instructor: Sherwood, Ozdowski. One course. 
C-L: Neuroscience 388LS
424S. The Biological, Chemical, and Physical Bases of Cell Shape and Cell Shape Changes. NS Cell 
shape and shape change are fundamental features of biological development and homeostasis. We investigate 
the intimate relationship between cellular structure and function at molecular, sub-cellular, cellular and 
tissue length scales. We study a range of cell types, from the very simple (e.g., red blood cells) to those that are 
structurally complex (e.g., epithelia, muscle and nerve). We integrate information from studies in vivo, in vitro, 
in cell free systems and on purified proteins. We learn from a combination of readings (reviews and primary 
literature), lectures, discussions and presentations by students. Prerequisite: Biology 201L and Biology 220, or 
equivalents. Instructor: Kiehart. One course.
425. Biophysics II. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Physics 415
427S. Current Topics in Sensory Biology. NS Exploration of recent and classic studies in sensory biology. 
Actual topics are chosen by students at the start of the semester. Usually includes vision, hearing, smell, taste, 
pheromones, electroreception, magnetoreception, bioluminescence, touch, time, and music. Recommended 
prerequisite: Biology 201L, or 201L and 202L, or 203L or the equivalent, and one course in Neuroscience, or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Johnsen. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 427S
429S. How Organisms Move. NS Connecting basic physics with biological systems to examine the 
principles of organismal movement. Course provides a quantitative and analytical foundation in the major 
modes of locomotion, such as flight, swimming, and walking, then applies this foundation to broader issues in 
science and society, such as the development of biologically-inspired mechanisms and the impact of climate 
change on organismal movement. Foundational lecture presentations, in-class group problem-solving and 
projects, and R-computer programming. Prerequisite: Physics 25, Physics 141L/141LA, Physics 151L, or Physics 
161D. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 203L or 201L and 202L. Instructor: Patek. One course.
431S. Human Embryology: Reproductive Biology in the 21st Century. EI, NS, STS The development 
of the mammalian embryo. Emphasis on human embryology and reproductive technologies, with major focus on 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 221

ethical, policy and social issues such as assisted reproduction, cloning, embryo selection, genome modification 
and surrogacy. The origin of major teratologies, evolution of developmental patterns, aspects of comparative 
development, and the molecular mechanisms of development are also discussed. Recommended prerequisite: 
previous college course work in anatomy, development, or reproductive biology. Instructor: Smith. One course.
432S. Biology of Host-Pathogen Interactions. NS Pathogens have evolved a broad set of strategies for 
growing and dividing in a host. We will explore the complex and dynamic host-pathogen interactions from the 
perspective of a variety of pathogenic organisms. This seminar style course will include lectures, discussions, 
readings, and presentations of primary literature by students. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 
203L. Instructor: Haase. One course.
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment. EI, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 
445A; also C-L: Public Policy 445A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
450S. Genomics of Adaptation: A Modern Look at Evolution. NS Contemporary studies of how 
populations and species evolved adaptations to their ecological habitats. Focus on modern methods of genome 
mapping and sequence data and analysis in wild populations that can identify genetic changes that contributed 
to ecological adaptations. Emphasis on case studies of genomics of adaptation in plant and animal systems, 
including humans and our adaptations to environments that our ancestors encountered as they colonized 
diverse habitats throughout the world. Examples will also illustrate how speciation and hybridization can 
contribute to adaptive biodiversity. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 202L or 203L or equivalent course. 
Instructor: Willis. One course. C-L: Science & Society
452S. Genes & Development. NS Literature-based seminar covering transcriptional regulation of 
development. Regulatory mechanisms and genome-wide approaches will be covered. Topics: embryogenesis, 
stem cells, transcription factors, regulatory networks, chromatin, nuclear organization, small RNAs, imprinting 
and Pol II pausing. Prerequisite: Biology 201L and 202L, or Biology 203L. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 
220 or 221D. Instructor: Baugh. One course. C-L: Science & Society
453S. Gene-Environment Interaction: Genes in an Ecological Context. NS Seminar on genotype-
environment interaction. Topics include the evolution and adaptive value of environment-dependent 
phenotypes (phenotypic plasticity), ecological consequences of genotype-environment interaction, molecular 
mechanisms of phenotypic plasticity, and how genotype-environment interaction pertains to outstanding 
debates in evolutionary biology and genetics. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 202L or 203L. Instructor: 
Donohue. One course.
454S. Physiological Genetics of Disease. NS, QS, R An exploration of how we have come to understand 
the relationships between genes and traits, with a focus on traits of biomedical importance. We explore how 
physiological systems biology can be used to understand the causal pathways by which genes affect traits. 
Examples will be taken largely from the biomedical literature with a focus on genetic diseases and the roles 
of genetic background and environment in determining how (and why) genes affect traits. Readings and class 
participation, short papers and oral presentations on research projects. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 
203L or 201L and 202L and Mathematics 112L. Instructor: Nijhout. One course.
460. Population Genetics. NS, QS Use of genetic sequence analysis to examine aspects of natural 
populations of humans and other organisms in the past and present. Topics include molecular phylogenetics; 
the origin, maintenance, and loss of major features of evolution; the evolutionary process at the molecular level; 
reconstruction of human origins and paleohistory; and genetic information in forensic studies. Not open to 
students who have taken Biology 250. Instructor: Uyenoyama. One course.
490. Topics in Biology. Lecture course on selected topic. Offerings vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
490S. Special Topics Seminar. Seminar on a selected topic. Offerings vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
490T. Tutorial. For junior and senior majors with consent of director of undergraduate studies and 
supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490T-1. Tutorial. For junior and senior majors with consent of director of undergraduate studies and 
supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. Half course.



 Biology (BIOLOGY)222

490TA. Tutorial (Topics). For junior and senior majors with consent of director of undergraduate studies 
and supervising instructor. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490TA-1. Tutorial (Topics). For junior and seniors with consent of director of undergraduate studies and 
supervising instructor. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
491. Independent Study: Advanced Topics. Reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of 
a Biology faculty member. Intended for students interested in studying topics not offered in regularly available 
courses. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491A. Independent Study: Advanced Topics. Reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of 
a Biology faculty member. Intended for students interested in studying topics not offered in regularly available 
courses. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
493. Research Independent Study. R Continuation of Biology 293. Individual research and reading of the 
primary literature in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of 
which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously 
approved topic. Open to juniors and seniors only with consent of supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Biology 
293 or Biology 379LA. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and 
Conservation
493A. Research Independent Study. R Continuation of Biology 293A. Individual research and reading 
of the primary literature in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major 
product of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a 
previously approved topic. Open to juniors and seniors only with consent of supervising instructor. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: Biology 293A or Biology 379LA. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
495. Scientific Arguments: Writing an Undergraduate Thesis. W Conventions of scientific writing, 
focusing on the process of writing a thesis or other major research paper in the natural sciences. Course 
intended for all candidates for Graduation with Distinction in Biology and Physics. Instructor: Reynolds. One 
course.
505. Functional Ecology of Plants. NS One course. C-L: see Environment 505
515. Principles of Immunology. NS, R One course. C-L: see Immunology 544
522S. Origins of Cellular Life on Earth and Beyond. NS This course discusses the origins of cellular life 
on Earth and beyond. We will ask: How did life originate? What are the limits of conditions that sustain life? Is 
there life elsewhere in the universe? How would we know life if we found it elsewhere (i.e., how is life defined)? 
This discussion-based course will delve into the literature reporting the biological and astrobiological research 
community’s response to life’s “big questions.” Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L, Chemistry 
201DL, and Biology 212L. Instructor: Schmid. One course.
540L. Mycology. NS Survey of the major groups of fungi with emphasis on life history and systematics. Field 
and laboratory exercises. Instructor: Vilgalys. One course.
546LS. Biology of Mammals. NS Lab-based version of Biology 546S. Instructor: Roth. One course.
546S. Biology of Mammals. NS The biology of mammals: diversity, evolutionary history, morphology, and 
aspects of physiology and ecology. Local field trips. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 21, 202L, or 203L, 
or equivalent. Instructor: Roth. One course.
547L. Entomology. NS The biology of insects: diversity, development, physiology, and ecology. Field trips. 
Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 21, 202L, or 203L, or equivalent. Instructor: H. Nijhout. One course.
555S. Problems in the Philosophy of Biology. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 634S
556. Systematic Biology. NS Theory and practice of identification, species discovery, phylogeny 
reconstruction, classification, and nomenclature. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 202L or 203L or 
equivalent. Instructor: Lutzoni. One course.
556L. Systematic Biology. NS Laboratory version of Biology 556. Theory and practice of identification, 
species discovery, phylogeny reconstruction, classification, and nomenclature. Recommended prerequisite: 



Biology (BIOLOGY) 223

Biology 202L or 203L or equivalent. Instructors: Lutzoni and Swofford. One course.
557L. Microbial Ecology and Evolution. NS, R Survey of new advances in the field of environmental 
and evolutionary microbiology, based on current literature, discussion, and laboratory exercises. Topics to 
include bacterial phylogeny, molecular ecology, emerging infectious diseases, bacterial symbiosis, experimental 
evolution, evolution of drug resistance, and microbial genomics. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 21, 
212L, 201L, 202L, or 203L. Instructor: Vilgalys. One course.
559S. Foundations of Behavioral Ecology. NS Readings on behavioral ecology, both historical papers and 
papers from the current literature that represent the most vital areas of research in the discipline. Instructors: 
Alberts. One course. C-L: University Program in Ecology 559S
561. Tropical Ecology. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 517; also C-L: Latin American Studies
563S. Stormwater Science: Pollution, Pavement, and Precipitation. NS Examines pollution 
emissions/deposition, impervious surfaces, evapotranspiration, groundwater, stormwater runoff, nutrients, 
thermal pollution, and freshwater effects. Uses primary literature, as well as a couple of books. Also examines 
“stormwater control measures” that mitigate problems. Student-driven course: Reading, presenting, and 
discussing primary literature, asking/answering questions in class, and seeking answers. Course designed for 
graduate and advanced undergraduate students. Prerequisites: one course in Ecology or Environmental Science 
or instructor consent. Instructor: Wilson. One course. C-L: Environment 565S
564. Biogeochemistry. NS, STS Processes controlling the circulation of carbon and biochemical elements 
in natural ecosystems and at the global level, with emphasis on soil and surficial processes. Topics include 
human impact on and social consequences of greenhouse gases, ozone, and heavy metals in the environment. 
Prerequisite: Chemistry 101DL or equivalent; Recommended: Chemistry 210DL. Instructor: Bernhardt. One 
course. C-L: Environment 564
564D. Biogeochemistry. NS, STS Discussion version of Biology 564. Processes controlling the circulation 
of carbon and biochemical elements in natural ecosystems and at the global level, with emphasis on soil and 
surficial processes. Topics include human impact on and social consequences of greenhouse gases, ozone, 
and heavy metals in the environment. Recommended prerequisite: Chemistry 101DL and 210DL. Instructor: 
Bernhardt. One course. C-L: Environment 564D
565L. Biodiversity Science and Application. NS, R Processes responsible for natural biodiversity from 
populations to the globe. Topics include species interactions (e.g., competition, predation, parasitism), natural 
and human disturbance, climate change, and implications for management and conservation. Lab section 
involving observation and data from large-scale manipulations, such as experimental hurricanes, fire, and 
herbivore exclosures. Instructors: Wright. One course. C-L: Environment 575L
565S. Biodiversity Science and Application. NS Non-lab version of Biology 565L. Processes responsible 
for natural biodiversity from populations to the globe. Topics include species interactions (e.g., competition, 
predation, parasitism), natural and human disturbance, climate change, and implications for management and 
conservation. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 209D-2 or equivalent. Instructor: Wright. One course. C-L: 
Environment 575S
566S. Understanding the Ecological Role of Plant Traits in Changing Environments. NS, 
R Ecophysiology studies the adaptation of organism’s physiology to its environment and provides a mechanistic 
framework for understanding how species respond to changing environments and how species interact with 
each other. As such, it plays a central role in understanding how organisms might respond to global change. This 
course will explore current topics in plant ecology by reading and discussing recent papers from the scientific 
literature. Recommended prerequisite: previous coursework in either ecology or physiology. Instructor: Wright. 
One course.
570LA-1. Experimental Tropical Marine Ecology. NS, R Distribution and density of marine and 
semi-terrestrial tropical invertebrate populations; behavioral and mechanical adaptations to physical stress, 
competition, and predation using rapid empirical approaches and hypothesis testing. Taught in Beaufort at 
Duke Marine Lab, with preparation for fieldwork before and analysis and presentation of projects after required 
one-week intensive field experience on the coast of Panama. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Diaz. 
Half course. C-L: Marine Sciences



 Biology (BIOLOGY)224

570LA-2. Marine Ecology of the Pacific Coast of California. NS, STS Ecology of the rocky intertidal, 
kelp forest, and mud flat habitats. Introduction to marine mammals, fish and other large West Coast vertebrates. 
Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab, with preparation for fieldwork before and analysis and presentation 
of projects after required one-week intensive field experience on the coast of Northern California. Prerequisite: 
introductory course in biology or environmental science and consent of instructor. Instructor: Johnson. Half 
course. C-L: Environment 570LA-2, Marine Sciences
571A. Sojourn in Singapore: Urban Tropical Ecology. CCI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 571A; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
579LA. Biological Oceanography. NS, R Variable credit. C-L: see Environment 579LA; also C-L: Earth and 
Ocean Sciences 579LA, Marine Sciences
588S. Macroevolution. NS Evolutionary patterns and processes at and above the species level; species 
concepts, speciation, diversification, extinction, ontogeny and phylogeny, rates of evolution, and alternative 
explanations for adaptation and evolutionary trends. Recommended prerequisite:  Biology 202L, 203L, or 
equivalent. Also recommended: one course in plant or animal diversity and one course in evolution beyond 
202L. Instructor: Roth. One course. C-L: Evolutionary Anthropology 588S
590. Topics in Biology. Lecture course on selected topic. Offerings vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
590S. Seminar (Topics). Seminar on a selected Topic. Offerings vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
627. Molecular Ecology. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 627; also C-L: Science & Society 627
650. Molecular Population Genetics. NS Genetic mechanisms of evolutionary change at the DNA sequence 
level. Models of nucleotide and amino acid substitution; linkage disequilibrium and joint evolution of multiple 
loci; analysis of evolutionary processes, including neutrality, adaptive selection, and hitchhiking; hypothesis 
testing in molecular evolution; estimation of evolutionary parameters; case histories of molecular evolution. 
For graduate students and undergraduates with interests in genetics, evolution, or mathematics. Instructor: 
Uyenoyama. One course.
652S. The Life and Work of Darwin. NS Readings by and about Darwin and his contemporaries, especially 
Wallace. Darwin’s “Autobiography” and Janet Browne’s biography as context for readings of some of his major 
works and works of his contemporaries. Consent of instructor required. Instructors: Alberts and McShea. One 
course. C-L: Evolutionary Anthropology 652S
660. Evolution from a Coalescence Perspective. NS Survey of theoretical and empirical aspects of 
modern population genetics in the post-coalescence era. Coincident with the development of coalescence 
theory, evolutionary biology began a profound and pervasive transformation. This course presents the basics 
of coalescence theory. It builds upon this perspective to address an array of summary statistics and inference 
methods developed for the analysis of genomic data. Instructor: Uyenoyama. One course. C-L: University 
Program in Genetics 660
665. Bayesian Inference for Environmental Models. NS Formulation of environmental models and 
applications to data using R. Distribution theory, algorithms, and implementation. Topics include physiology, 
population growth, species interactions, disturbance, and ecosystem dynamics. Discussions focus on classical 
and current primary literature. Instructor: J. Clark. One course. C-L: Environment 665, Information Science + 
Studies
668. Population Ecology. NS Key questions in population ecology from a theoretical perspective. Topics 
include demography and dynamics of structured populations, population regulation, stochastic and spatial 
population dynamics, life history characteristics, species interactions, and conservation of threatened 
populations. Computer labs will emphasize fitting models to data. Prerequisites: One course in Ecology. 
Instructor: Morris. One course.
678. Population Ecology for a Changing Planet. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 678



Biology (BIOLOGY) 225

The Major
The bachelor of arts and the bachelor of science degrees are offered with a major in biology or in an 

individually designed interdepartmental concentration approved by the director of undergraduate studies in 
biology. Information may be obtained in the office of the director of undergraduate studies. 

For the AB Degree
This degree program is the general liberal arts major program. Students contemplating a career in biological 

or biomedical sciences should elect the program leading to the BS degree. A minimum of thirteen courses is 
required for this major.

Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or equivalent
Corequisites. Mathematics 105L and 106L, or equivalent, or Statistical Science 101 or above (102 

recommended) or Biology 304
Major Requirements. One or two gateway courses: Either one in molecular biology (Biology 201L) and 

one in genetics and evolution (Biology 202L), or for students with a 5 on AP exam or equivalent, one course 
in molecular biology, genetics and evolution (Biology 203L). These courses are prerequisites to many of the 
advanced courses in these subject areas. In addition to the Biology 201L and 202L, a minimum of eight full 
courses in at least eight course registrations in the biological sciences, not including the above corequisites or 
courses specified not for science majors; or, in addition to the Biology 203L a minimum of nine full courses in at 
least nine course registrations in the biological sciences, not including the above corequisites or courses specified 
not for science majors; two of these eight (or nine) courses must include related laboratory experience at the 200 
level or above; one laboratory independent study course may be counted toward the laboratory requirement. 
The eight (or nine) courses must include one course in structure and function (chosen from a list of approved 
courses), one course in organismal diversity (chosen from a list of approved courses), and one course in ecology 
(chosen from a list of approved courses). The remaining courses may be elected from among courses numbered 
200 or above in biology; or from approved courses in the basic science departments of the School of Medicine; or 
from approved courses of a basic biological character in related departments. Six of these eight (or nine) courses 
must be in biology. A maximum of two independent study or tutorial courses may be counted toward the eight (or 
nine) course minimum. At least one of these eight (or nine) courses must be an advanced course at the 400 level 
or above in biology. This requirement may not be satisfied by a first semester of an independent study but may be 
satisfied by a second semester continuation of an independent study. The elective courses acceptable for a biology 
major with an area of concentration (see below) are defined by the requirements for that concentration.

For the BS Degree
This is the program in biology for students contemplating a career in biological or biomedical sciences. A 

minimum of fifteen courses is required for this major.
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or equivalent.
Corequisites. Chemistry 201DL; Mathematics 21 or 111L, either Calculus II (122, 112L, or 122L) or Statistical 

Science 101 or above (or 102 recommended) or Biology 304. Physics 141L or 151L. Additional corequisites may be 
required for professional schools or particular areas of concentration (see below). 

Major Requirements. One or or two gateway courses: Either one in molecular biology (Biology 201L) 
and one in genetics and evolution (Biology 202L), or for students with a 5 on AP exam or equivalent, one course 
in molecular biology, genetics and evolution (Biology 203L). These courses are prerequisites to many of the 
advanced courses in these subject areas. In addition to the Biology 201L and 202L, a minimum of eight full 
courses in at least eight course registrations in the biological sciences, not including the above corequisites or 
courses specified not for science majors; or, in addition to the Biology 203L a minimum of nine full courses in at 
least nine course registrations in the biological sciences, not including the above corequisites or courses specified 
not for science majors; two of these eight (or nine) courses must include related laboratory experience at the 200 
level or above; one laboratory independent study course may be counted toward the laboratory requirement. The 
eight (or nine) courses must include one course in structure and function (chosen from a list of approved courses), 
one course in organismal diversity (chosen from a list of approved courses), and one course in ecology (chosen 
from a list of approved courses). The remaining courses may be elected from among courses numbered 200 or 
above in biology; or from approved courses in the basic science departments of the School of Medicine; or from 
approved courses of a basic biological character in related departments. Six of these eight (or nine) courses must 
be in biology. A maximum of two independent study or tutorial courses may be counted toward the eight (or nine) 
course minimum. At least one of these eight (or nine) courses must be an advanced course at the 400 level in 



 Biology (BIOLOGY)226

biology. This requirement may not be satisfied by a first semester of an independent study but may be satisfied by 
a second semester continuation of an independent study. The elective courses acceptable for a biology major with 
an area of concentration (see below) are defined by the requirements for that concentration.

Areas of Concentration
Students may elect to complete requirements in specified areas of concentration. Currently available areas 

of concentration in the biology major are anatomy, physiology and biomechanics; animal behavior; biochemistry; 
cell and molecular biology; ecology; evolutionary biology; genetics; genomics; marine biology; neurobiology; 
pharmacology; and plant biology. For information on areas of concentration see the director of undergraduate 
studies.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Biology majors who achieve excellence in both their studies and a research-based thesis may apply for 

Graduation with Distinction in biology. Students may apply if they have a grade point average of 3.0 or above in 
biology courses, not including independent study, at the time of application. The award of distinction requires the 
maintenance of this grade point average and completion of an original research project, usually carried out as an 
independent study in biology or as an interdisciplinary study that includes biology. The application for distinction 
must be endorsed by the student’s research supervisor. Distinction will be awarded by a three-member faculty 
committee based on an oral poster presentation and the written thesis. Two levels of distinction are offered in 
biology: Distinction and High Distinction. See the director of undergraduate studies for more details.

The Minor
Minor Requirements. Five courses in biology, which may include the gateway courses, but not including 

Advanced Placement credit (Biology 20); the five courses may include any course numbered 200 or above in 
biology. A maximum of one course from approved courses in the basic science departments of the School of 
Medicine or from approved courses of a basic biological character in related departments. A maximum of one 
independent study or tutorial courses may be counted toward the five courses. 

Biomedical Engineering
For courses in biomedical engineering, see page 816.

Biophysics
For more information about the major in biophysics, see Physics (on page 616).

Cell Biology
For courses in cell biology, see Biology (on page 209) and Medicine (School)—Graduate (School) Basic 

Science Courses Open to Undergraduates (on page 808).

Chemistry
Professor Franz, Chair; Professor Hong, Associate Chair; Associate Professor of the Practice Canelas, Director of 
Undergraduate Studies; Professors Ashby, Baldwin, Becker, Beratan, Craig, Fitzgerald, Franz, Hong, Liu, McCaf-
ferty, Rubinstein, Therien, Vo-Dinh, Warren, Widenhoefer, and Yang; Associate Professors Charbonneau, Frank-
lin, Hargrove, MacPhail, Malcolmson, Wang, and Wiley; Assistant Professors Derbyshire, Roizen, and Welsher; 
Professors Emeriti Arnett, Chesnut, Crumbliss, McPhail, Palmer, Quin, Ramsay-Shaw, Toone, and Wells; Asso-
ciate Professors of the Practice Canelas and Roy; Associate Research Professors Fischer and Zhang; Assistant Re-
search Professor Migliore; Secondary Appointments: Professors Al-Hashimi, Chilkoti, Donald, Lefkowitz, Mitzi, 
Modrich, West, Zauscher, and Zhou; Associate Professors Arya, Blum, Brown, Delaire, Ferguson, Lu, Payne, and 
Yokoyama; Assistant Professors Lynch; Lecturing Fellow Woerner; Instructors Kersey and Fowler

A major and a minor are available in this department. 



Chemistry (CHEM) 227

Courses in Chemistry (CHEM)
20. General Chemistry Credit. Pre-matriculation credit awarded for a score of 4 on the College Board AP 
chemistry examination (or the equivalent). Recommended placement is Chemistry 110DL, but a student may 
choose to take Chemistry 101DL without loss of credit. Students completing both Chemistry 101DL and 210DL, 
or both Chemistry 110DL and 210DL forfeit entrance credit for Chemistry 20. One course.
21. General Chemistry Credit. Pre-matriculation credit awarded for a score of 5 on the College Board AP 
chemistry examination (or the equivalent). Recommended placement is Chemistry 201DL, but a student may 
choose to take Chemistry 110DL without loss of credit. Students completing both Chemistry 101DL and 210DL, 
or both Chemistry 110DL and 210DL forfeit entrance credit for Chemistry 21. One course.
81S. Introduction to Research in Chemistry. EI, NS, R Active participation in chemistry (or chemistry 
related) research group, accompanied by seminar classes covering research methodologies, case studies of 
ethical issues in chemistry, and communication of results of research. Prerequisite: Chemistry 101DL, or 110DL, 
or 20, or 21. Instructor: Staff. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
91. Chemistry, Technology, and Society. NS, STS Science, the scientific method, and background topics 
from chemistry, biochemistry, and environmental chemistry that enable citizens to utilize the inductive-
deductive methodology of science to better evaluate the potential benefits and risks associated with selected 
existing and proposed technologies. Intended primarily for non-science majors. Normally not open to students 
who have credit for, or are enrolled in, Chemistry 20, 21, or 101DL. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Energy 
and the Environment
99D. Introduction to Chemistry and Chemical Problem Solving. NS Introductory course for students 
with limited background in chemistry emphasizing chemical problem solving. Topics include atoms, molecules, 
ions, compounds, and the periodic table, stoichiometry and chemical reactions, reactions in solution, and an 
introduction to chemical bonding, thermochemistry, and gas laws. To be followed by Chemistry 101DL. Not 
open to students who have credit for Chemistry 20, 21 or 101DL. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101DL. Core Concepts in Chemistry. NS Emphasizes core concepts required for organic chemistry, 
including atomic and molecular structure, chemical equilibrium with applications to acids and bases, 
thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, and reaction mechanisms. Relevance and integrated nature of these 
concepts illustrated through applications to a modern theme in chemistry, e.g. in biological, materials, or 
environmental chemistry. Laboratory illustrates experimental applications of these core concepts. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
110DL. Honors Chemistry: Core Concepts in Context. NS Emphasizes core concepts required for 
organic chemistry, including atomic and molecular structure, chemical equilibrium with applications to acids 
and bases, thermodynamics, chemical kinetics, and reaction mechanisms. Strong emphasis on applications of 
these concepts in context of large, interdisciplinary scientific challenge, e.g. in cancer biology or nanoscience. 
Laboratory illustrates experimental applications of these core concepts. Students may not receive credit for both 
Chemistry 101DL and 110DL. Instructor: Staff. One course.
130L. The Chemistry and Physics of Cooking. NS Explores the chemistry and physics of cooking, 
including how famous chefs use basic science to create gastronomic art. Includes both lecture and laboratory 
components. Open to first-year students, or with permission of instructor. Prerequisite: Chemistry 99D or an 
equivalent background in chemistry. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Charbonneau. One course.
180. Chemistry Outreach: Sharing Chemistry with the Community. NS Principles of chemistry 
outreach with emphasis on chemical demonstrations. Activities include readings, discussion, and practice 
related to staging effective demonstrations, as well as structured service-learning experiences in local schools 
and other venues. Societal issues relevant to chemistry outreach will be examined, along with assessment and 
pedagogical strategies. Participation in service-learning is required. Prerequisites: Chemistry 101DL, or 110DL, 
or 20, or 21. Instructor: Lyle. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Chemistry. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics in Chemistry. Focus version of Chemistry 190S. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Chemistry (CHEM)228

190S. Special Topics in Chemistry. Seminar on special topics in chemistry and chemistry related areas. 
Content varies by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201DL. Organic Chemistry I. NS, STS The structures and reactions of the compounds of carbon and the 
impact of selected organic compounds on society. Laboratory: techniques of separation, organic reactions 
and preparations, and systematic identification of compounds by their spectral and chemical properties. 
Prerequisite: Chemistry 101DL, or 110DL, or 21. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201DLA. Organic Chemistry I at the Duke Marine Lab. NS, STS The structures and reactions of the 
compounds of carbon and the impact of selected organic compounds on society. Laboratory: techniques of 
separation, organic reactions and preparations, and systematic identification of compounds by their spectral 
and chemical properties. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: Chemistry 101DL, 110DL, or 21. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
202L. Organic Chemistry II. NS, STS Continuation of Chemistry 201DL. Prerequisite: Chemistry 201DL. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
202LA. Organic Chemistry II. NS, STS Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: Chemistry 
20, 21, 101DL, or 110DL. Instructor: Roy. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
210DL. Modern Applications of Chemical Principles. NS Modern applications of chemistry in context 
of larger scientific theme, e.g. in biology, materials science, or environmental chemistry. Revisits core concepts 
from Chemistry 101DL or 110DL, incorporating additional topics including intermolecular interactions, phases 
of matter, solutions, quantitative treatment of aqueous equilibria, electron transfer reactions, and inorganic 
and coordination chemistry. Laboratory illustrates experimental approaches to modern problems in biological, 
materials, and environmental chemistry, as well as analytical and synthetic techniques. Prerequisite: Chemistry 
101DL or 110DL. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics In Chemistry. Seminar on special topics in chemistry and chemistry-related areas. 
Content varies by semester. Consent of department required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295. Introduction to Research Independent Study. NS, W Includes research methodology, retrieval 
techniques for, and use of, the chemical literature, safety in the research laboratory, the ethical conduct of 
research, and writing a research proposal. Co-requisite: registration for a first course in research independent 
study in chemistry (393) or a related area. Lecture/discussion. Instructor: Roy. Half course.
301. Elements of Physical Chemistry. NS Survey of physical chemistry including quantum chemistry, 
molecular structure, molecular spectroscopy, thermodynamics, and kinetics. Prerequisites: Chemistry 210DL; or 
Chemistry 20 plus 101DL; or Chemistry 20 plus 110DL; or Chemistry 21; Mathematics 112L, and Physics 142L or 
152L or 162L or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301L. Physical Chemistry Laboratory. NS, W Laboratory experiments designed to accompany Chemistry 
301. Includes instruction and practice in writing the laboratory notebook and formal laboratory reports. 
Prerequisite: (or corequisite) Chemistry 301. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
302. How Does Biology Work? The Physical and Chemical Underpinnings of Biological 
Nanomachines. NS An introduction to biophysical chemistry and molecular biophysics. Explores principles 
that underpin biological structure and function through such topics as: how the structure and function of 
biomolecules can be studied at the level of single molecules; how biomolecular machines capture energy and 
do work; how biomolecules function within networks to convey signals, act cooperatively, and form patterns. 
Recommended prerequisite: Chemistry 301 or 311 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Beratan. One course.
310. Physical Chemistry I. NS Fundamentals of physical chemistry. Emphasizes quantum chemistry, 
molecular structure, and molecular spectroscopy. Chemistry 310L should be taken concurrently with Chemistry 
310. Prerequisites: Chemistry 210DL; or Chemistry 20 plus 101DL; or Chemistry 20 plus 110DL; or Chemistry 
21; Mathematics 212, Physics 142L, 152L, or 162L or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
310L. Physical Chemistry I Laboratory. NS, W Laboratory experiments designed to accompany 
Chemistry 310. Includes instruction and practice in writing the laboratory notebook and formal laboratory 
reports. Prerequisite: (or corequisite) Chemistry 310. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
311. Physical Chemistry II. NS Continuation of Chemistry 310. Fundamentals of physical chemistry. 
Emphasizes thermodynamics and kinetics. Chemistry 311L should be taken concurrently with Chemistry 311. 



Chemistry (CHEM) 229

Prerequisite: Chemistry 310 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
311L. Physical Chemistry II Laboratory. NS, W Laboratory experiments designed to accompany 
Chemistry 311. Prerequisite: (or corequisite). Chemistry 311 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Chemistry 393. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401. Analytical Chemistry. NS Fundamentals of qualitative and quantitative measurement with emphasis 
on chemometrics, quantitative spectrometry, electrochemical methods, and common separation techniques. 
Corequisite: Chemistry 401L. Prerequisite: Chemistry 301L or 310L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401L. Analytical Chemistry Laboratory. NS Laboratory experiments designed to accompany Chemistry 
401. Corequisite: Chemistry 401. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
410. Inorganic Chemistry. NS Bonding, structures, and reactions of inorganic compounds studied through 
physical chemical concepts. Prerequisite: Chemistry 301 or 311. Instructor: Staff. One course.
420L. Advanced Laboratory Techniques. NS Techniques for synthesis include the use of high or 
low pressure, high or low temperature, microwave synthesis, and/or inert atmospheres. Techniques for 
characterization of synthetic products include electrical conductance; optical rotation NMR; UV-VIS, IR, and/or 
mass spectra. Prerequisite: (or corequisite) Chemistry 410. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
493. Research Independent Study. R See Chemistry 393. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Chemistry 393. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
496. Graduation with Distinction in Chemistry. Course for majors who are candidates for graduation 
with distinction in chemistry. Includes preparation of the research thesis, preparation and presentation of a 
poster describing student’s research, and oral defense of the research thesis. Pre- or co-requisite: two semesters 
of research independent study. Lecture/discussion. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Staff. 
Half course.
501. Analytical Chemistry. Fundamental considerations of chemical measurements, optical spectroscopy, 
mass spectrometry, and separation methods. Instructor: Fitzgerald. One course.
506. Biomolecular Mass Spectrometry. Advanced topics in the mass spectral characterization of 
biopolymers with an emphasis on protein and DNA analysis. Fundamental and practical aspects of the 
ionization processes and the instrumentation associated with MALDI- and ESI-Mass spectrometry discussed 
along with applications of these techniques to structural problems in chemistry and biochemistry. Prerequisite: 
Chemistry 501 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Fitzgerald. Half course.
511. Chemistry of Biomolecular Interactions. Chemistry of the noncovalent interactions governing 
biological systems. Topics include: review of biomacromolecules; chemical principles of non-covalent 
interactions and the use of model systems; experimental methods to determine binding interactions; 
interactions responsible for molecular recognition in biological systems; and applications in signal regulation. 
Recommended precursor to Chemistry 518. Instructor: Hargrove. One course.
517. Molecules in Life and Disease. NS Molecules are an essential component of life as they dictate our 
development, enable adaptation to our environment, and carry our thoughts. This course explores the roles 
of molecules in normal physiological functions and disease states ranging from genetic disorders to those 
caused by deadly toxins, such as anthraxin toxin. Case studies on bacterial pathogenesis, drug resistance and 
modern drug development are among the topics that will be discussed. Prerequisites: Organic Chemistry and 
Introductory Biology or consent of instructor. Instructor: Derbyshire. One course.
518. Chemical Biology. The application of chemical concepts and methods to solving problems in molecular 



 Chemistry (CHEM)230

and cell biology, with emphasis on the use of small molecules to elucidate and control information transfer 
in biological systems. Provides relevant background on both useful chemical tools and new biological targets. 
Instructors: Hong, McCafferty, and Wang. One course.
521. Inorganic Chemistry. Bonding and spectroscopy, reactions, transition metal chemistry, main group 
chemistry, organometallics/catalysis, and solid state. Instructors: Franz and Therien. One course.
524. Bioinorganic Chemistry. Topics covered include metal activated enzymes in hydrolysis, oxygencarriers, 
nitrogen fixation, iron storage and transport, photosynthesis, protein electron transfer, and DNA mediated 
electron transfer. Instructors: Franz and Therien. Variable credit.
526. Inorganic Reaction Mechanisms. A discussion of the mechanism of coordination reactions in 
solution. Examples include redox reactions and linear free energy relationships. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
531. Organic Chemistry. Bonding and structure, stereochemistry, conformational analysis, substitution, 
addition, and elimination reactions, carbon reactive intermediates, concerted reactions, photochemistry, carbon 
alkylation, carbonyl addition nucleophilic substitution, electrophilic additions, reduction, cycloadditions, 
rearrangements, main group organometallics, oxidation. Instructors: Baldwin, Craig, Hong, and Widenhoefer. 
One course.
532. Organic Reactions. Highlights strategic operations that enable selective synthesis of small molecules, 
including organic ligands, natural products, and molecular probes. Topics include chemical synthesis 
and retrosynthetic analysis; arrow-pushing mechanisms of polar, radical, transition metal-mediated and 
pericyclic reactions; protecting groups, oxidation, reduction, enolate reactivity; stereoselective reactions and 
conformational analysis; cross-coupling transformations. Instructor: Hong and Roizen. One course.
533. Nuclear Magnetic Resonance. Structural elucidation of organic and inorganic compounds by NMR. 
Fundamentals of data acquisition (pulse sequences, detection), multidimensional techniques, study of dynamic 
processes and their application to the determination of structure. Instructors: Baldwin and Widenhoefer. 
Variable credit.
534. Physical Organic Chemistry. Reactive intermediates: carbocations, carbanions, carbenes radicals, 
photochemistry. Prerequisite: Chemistry 531. Instructor: Craig. One course.
535. Organic Synthesis. NS Application of organic reactions to the synthesis of structurally and biologically 
interesting compounds. Topics include synthetic design, retrosynthetic analysis, synthetic methods, and total 
syntheses of natural products. Prerequisite: Chemistry 532 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Baldwin and 
Hong. One course.
536. Bioorganic Chemistry. Basic enzymology, mechanisms of enzymatic reactions, cofactors, 
oxidoreductases, C1 chemistry, carbon-carbon bond formation, carboxylation/decarboxylation, heme, pyridoxal 
enzymes, thiamine enzymes. Prerequisite: Chemistry 331 or equivalent. Instructor: McCafferty. One course. C-L: 
Biochemistry 536
538. Organometallic Chemistry and Catalysis. Introduction to the structure and bonding of 
organometallic and coordination complexes, stressing the origin of metal-ligand interactions from a molecular 
orbital theory perspective. Elementary reactions of transition metal complexes and their application to organic 
synthesis, with special emphasis on catalytic reactions. General concepts of catalysis and the advantages and 
benefits of catalytic systems. Instructor: Malcolmson. One course.
541. Quantum Chemistry. Foundations and approximate methods in quantum chemistry, with an emphasis 
on their applications to molecular structure and modeling. Instructors: Beratan, Liu, MacPhail, Warren, and 
Yang. One course.
542. Quantum Mechanics. Special emphasis on chemical applications. Topics include: linear algebra, 
the uncertainty relations, angular momentum, perturbation theory, time-dependent phenomena, molecules 
in electromagnetic fields, group theory, and electron correlation. Prerequisite: Chemistry 541 or consent of 
instructor. Instructors: Beratan, Warren, and Yang. One course.
543. Statistical Thermodynamics. Introduction to statistical thermodynamics, with an emphasis on ideal 
systems and selected model approaches to more complex systems, for example, lattice models. Instructors: 
Beratan, Charbonneau, MacPhail, and Yang. Half course.
544. Statistical Mechanics. Fundamentals of quantum and classical statistical mechanics using the ensemble 



Chemistry (CHEM) 231

approach. Introduction of modern techniques and applications including the renormalization group treatment 
of phase transitions and linear response theory of time-dependent statistical mechanics. Prerequisite: Chemistry 
543 or consent of instructor. Instructors: Beratan, Charbonneau, MacPhail, and Yang. One course.
548. Solid-State and Materials Chemistry. Introduction to the structure, physical, and electronic 
properties of solid-state materials. Instructor: Liu, Franklin, and Wiley. One course.
590. Special Topics in Chemistry. Special topics in chemistry and chemistry-related areas. Content varies 
by instructor. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
590-1. Special Topics in Chemistry. Special topics in chemistry and chemistry-related areas. Content varies 
by instructor. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
601. Biosensors. Theory and applications of biosensors. Basic principles of interactions between analytes 
and bioreceptors and various transduction techniques: optical, electrochemical, ion-selective electrode-based, 
voltametric, conductometric, and mass-sensitive techniques as well as novel nanotechnology-based biosensing 
systems including nanosensors, plasmonic nanoprobes, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, molecular beacons, 
and molecular sentinel systems. Applications in chemical, environmental, biological and medical sensing. Paired 
with Biomedical Engineering 567. Prerequisites: senior or graduate standing or instructor’s consent. Instructor: 
Vo-Dinh. One course.
611. Foundations of Nanoscale Science and Technology. One course. C-L: see Nanosciences 511; also 
C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 511
630. Advances in Photonics (GE, IM). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 555

For the AB Degree
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L.
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L, or 310 and 310L and 

311, 401, 401L plus one of the following three course options:
• Three of the following: Chemistry 302, 410, any 500 or 600 level courses; Biochemistry 301, 302.
• One of the following: Chemistry 302 or 311, 410, any 500 or 600 level courses; Biochemistry 301 plus 

Chemistry 393 and 394 or the equivalent in an approved chemistry-related discipline.
• One of the following:

• Physics emphasis. Chemistry 302 or 311; plus two of the following: Physics 264L, 361, 362. 
• Mathematics emphasis. Chemistry 302 or 311; plus either of the following pairs of courses: 

Mathematics 221 and Mathematics 356, or Mathematics 216 and Mathematics 353.
• Biology emphasis. Biochemistry 301 plus two of the following: Biology 201L, 214L, 220, 227, 329L, 

414LS, and 515.
In certain cases, substitutions may be made for courses outside the chemistry department with consent of 

the director of undergraduate studies.

For the BS Degree
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L, 212; Physics 141L-142L 

or 151L-152L, or 161L-162L.
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 310, 310L, 311, 311L, 393 (or its 

equivalent in an approved chemistry-related discipline), 401, 401L, 410, 420L; plus two additional courses 
selected from the following: Biochemistry 3011; Chemistry 302, 3941 (or its equivalent in an approved chemistry-
related discipline)1, and any chemistry courses at the 500 or 600 level.

The Concentration in Biochemistry
In cooperation with the Department of Biochemistry in the School of Medicine, the chemistry department 

offers both an AB and a BS degree in chemistry with concentration in biochemistry. Certification of this 
concentration is designated on the official transcript.

1 Certification of the BS degree by the American Chemical Society requires Biochemistry 301, Chemistry 394, plus 
Chemistry 295.



 Chemistry (CHEM)232

For the AB Degree with Concentration in Biochemistry
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L.
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301and 301L, or 310 and 310L and 311, 

401, 401L; Biochemistry 301, 302; plus one of the following: (Chemistry 393, Biology 293, or Biochemistry 593).

For the BS Degree with Concentration in Biochemistry
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L.
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L and 302, or 310 and 

310L and 311, 401, 401L, 410; Biochemistry 301, 302; Biology 220; plus one of the following: Chemistry 393, 
Biology 293, or Biochemistry 593. 

The Concentration in Chemical Biology
The chemistry department offers both an AB and a BS degree in chemistry with a concentration in chemical 

biology. Certification of the concentration is designated on the official transcript.

For the AB Degree with Concentration in Chemical Biology
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L. 
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L, or 310 and 310L and 

311, 401, 401L; Biochemistry 301; Chemistry 517 and 518 plus two semesters of independent study involving some 
aspect of chemical biology (Chemistry 393, 394 or the equivalent in an approved chemistry-related discipline).

For the BS Degree with Concentration in Chemical Biology
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L. 
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L and 302, or 310 and 

310L and 311, 401, 401L, 410; Biochemistry 301; Chemistry 517 and 518 plus two semesters of independent study 
involving some aspect of chemical biology (Chemistry 393, 394 or the equivalent in an approved chemistry-related 
discipline).

The Concentration in Environmental Chemistry
In conjunction with the Nicholas School of the Environment, the chemistry department is pleased to offer 

both an AB and a BS degree in chemistry with concentration in environmental chemistry. Official recognition of 
the completion of the requirements given below will appear on the permanent transcript of a major. 

For the AB Degree with Concentration in Environmental Chemistry
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L.
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L, or 310 and 310L and 

311, 401, 401L; Environment 360; plus two of the following: Environment 239, 540, 542L, Civil Engineering 565, 
667; plus one semester of independent study involving some aspect of environmental chemistry (Chemistry 393 
or Environment 393 or Civil Engineering 391).

For the BS Degree in Chemistry with Concentration in Environmental 
Chemistry

Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 
151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L.



Chemistry (CHEM) 233

Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L and 302, or 310 and 
310L and 311, 401, 401L, 410; Environment 360; plus two of the following: Environment 239, 540, 542L, Civil 
Engineering 565, 667; plus one semester of independent study involving some aspect of environmental chemistry 
(Chemistry 393 or Environment 393 or Civil Engineering 391).

The Concentration in Pharmacology
In conjunction with the Department of Pharmacology in the School of Medicine, the chemistry department 

offers both an AB and a BS degree in chemistry with a concentration in pharmacology. Certification of the 
concentration is designated on the official transcript.

For the AB Degree with Concentration in Pharmacology
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L. 
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L, or 310 and 310L and 

311, 401, 401L; Biochemistry 301; Pharmacology 350 and 360; plus two semesters of independent study involving 
some aspect of pharmacology (Chemistry 393, 394 or Pharmacology 493, 494).

For the BS Degree with Concentration in Pharmacology
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; Mathematics 111L-112L, or 122L; Physics 141L-142L or 

151L-152L, or 161L-162L; Biology 201L. 
Major Requirements. Chemistry 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20 or 21, 301 and 301L and 302, or 310 and 

310L and 311, 401, 401L, 410; Biochemistry 301; Pharmacology 350 and 360; plus two semesters of independent 
study involving some aspect of pharmacology (Chemistry 393, 394 or Pharmacology 493, 494).

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers a program for Graduation with Distinction in chemistry. Selection for the honor by 

the Chemistry Department Undergraduate Awards Committee is based on fulfilling the following requirements: 
at least a B average in chemistry courses at the time of application and at graduation, satisfactory completion 
of at least two courses of research independent study in chemistry (or in an approved chemistry-related area), 
enrollment and participation in Chemistry 295 (Introduction to Research Independent Study) and Chemistry 496 
(Graduation with Distinction in Chemistry), submission of a high quality research thesis based upon the results 
of independent study, nomination for the honor by the research advisor, presentation of a poster on the research 
project, and an oral defense of the research thesis.

The Minor
Requirements. Chemistry 101DL or 110DL or 21; plus four additional courses selected from the following: 

Chemistry 180, 201DL, 202L, 210DL or 20, Chemistry courses numbered above 210; Biochemistry 301, 302; 
Biology 372A; Environment 540, 542; Pharmacology 350, 360, 533.

In certain cases, substitutions may be made for courses outside the chemistry department with the consent 
of the director of undergraduate studies.

Child Policy Research
Associate Research Professor Muschkin, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The goal of the certificate in child policy research is to provide undergraduates with the opportunity to engage 

in interdisciplinary inquiry to solve problems facing today’s children and families. Because of the complexity of 
these problems, the certificate allows students the opportunity to study issues by incorporating the perspectives 
of numerous disciplines, including psychology, sociology, public policy, economics, and education. The certificate 
emphasizes engagement in empirical research; each student will work closely with a faculty member to produce 



 Child Policy Research (CHILDPOL)234

an original research paper. Examples of research topics that may be pursued with this certificate include social 
and economic inequalities in schooling, the pervasiveness of gang violence in high schools, or the long-term 
consequences of childhood obesity. The certificate program culminates in a capstone seminar, in which students 
build upon the research experience by exploring real-world implications and translating their scholarship to 
policy solutions.

Certificate Requirements
In order to complete the certificate, students must take six courses: the cornerstone course Child Policy 

Research 250S, the capstone course Child Policy Research 495S (Multidisciplinary Approaches to Contemporary 
Children’s Issues), two electives, one research course, and one methods course. The research course is an 
independent study: students may register for Child Policy Research 350S or for an independent study in public 
policy or another department. The research course requirement also may be fulfilled through completion of an 
honors thesis in the student’s home department. The methods course can either be Child Policy Research 241 
(Multi-Method Approaches to Social and Policy Research) (cross-listed with Public Policy 241) or a methods 
course in the student’s home department. Both the research course and the methods course must be approved 
by the certificate director. The two electives may be drawn from a list of pre-approved electives. Two courses that 
are counted toward this certificate may also be used to satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, or other 
certificate program. Three of the courses that count toward the certificate may originate in a single department 
or program. More information is available at https://childandfamilypolicy.duke.edu/students/child-policy-
research-certificate/. The certificate director is available to provide additional information and guidance. Contact 
muschkin@duke.edu.

Courses in Child Policy Research (CHILDPOL)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Open only to first year students. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
241. Multi-Method Approaches to Social and Policy Research. QS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public 
Policy 241
241A. Multi-Method Approaches to Social and Policy Research. QS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public 
Policy 241A
250S. Child Policy Research. R, SS Major developmental stages of childhood and influences in a 
child’s life: parents/family life, schools, communities, and the economy. Emphasis on 1) applying theory for 
analyzing complex societal problems (often involving issues of race, class, and gender); 2) using material 
and methodologies from psychology, sociology, economics, and public policy. Required course for certificate 
program Child Policy Research, but open to all undergraduate students. Instructor: Muschkin. One course. C-L: 
Public Policy 242S
290. Selected Child Policy Research Topics. Topics vary but pertain to the development and social and 
economic well-being of children and their families. Interdisciplinary in nature and drawing material from 
disciplines such as sociology, psychology, public policy, economics, and education. An elective course for 
students pursuing Child Policy Research certificate. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Selected Child Policy Research Seminar Topics. Seminar version of Child Policy Research Topics 
290. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R, SS Individual research on a topic of special interest under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper containing significant analysis 
and interpretation. Consent of instructor and director of the Child Policy Research certificate program required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Multidisciplinary Approaches to Contemporary Children’s Issues. R, SS An integrative, 
multi-disciplinary study of the psychological, social, and political factors that affect American children and 
families. Specific topics to be determined by students and instructor, for example, the behavioral and economic 
consequences of juvenile delinquency; the implications of different family structures on infants, children, and 
adolescents; or the civic and social responsibilities of public education. Individual and group research projects 
required. Capstone course required for the Child Policy Research certificate program. Consent of Director of that 
certificate program required. One course. C-L: Public Policy 420S

https://childandfamilypolicy.duke.edu/students/child-policy-research-certificate/
https://childandfamilypolicy.duke.edu/students/child-policy-research-certificate/
mailto:muschkin%40duke.edu?subject=


Child Policy Research (CHILDPOL) 235

590. Advanced Child Policy Research Topics. Topics vary but pertain to the development and social 
and economic well-being of children and their families. Interdisciplinary in nature and drawing material from 
disciplines such as sociology, psychology, public policy, economics, and education. An elective course for 
students pursuing Child Policy Research certificate. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Advanced Child Policy Research Seminar Topics. Seminar version of Child Policy Research 590. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
634S. Making Social Policy. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 563S; also C-L: Sociology 634S

Electives
Students will choose two electives from the following list of preapproved courses. If a student wishes to take 

a course for certificate credit that is not on the preapproved list, then the certificate director will decide on the 
appropriateness of that course on a case-by-case basis.
African & African American Studies
549S. Schooling and Social Stratification
Documentary Studies
202S. Children and the Experience of Illness
Education
240. Educational Psychology
241. Promising Paradigms: Issues and Innovations in American Classrooms
243S. Children, Schools, and Society
321S. Infancy, Early Childhood, and Educational Programs
542S. Schooling and Social Stratification
Psychology
207. Child Clinical Psychology
239. Adolescence
240. Educational Psychology
304. Child Observation
325. Social Development from Childhood to Early Adulthood
436S. Clinical Interventions with Children and Families
438S. Children’s Peer Relations
Public Policy
243S. Children, Schools, and Society
245. Promising Paradigms: Issues and Innovations in American Classrooms
395S. Children and the Experience of Illness
542S. Schooling and Social Stratification
544S. Schools and Social Policy
563S. Making Social Policy
608. Economics of the Family
Sociology
210. Contemporary Social Problems
219. Juvenile Delinquency
225. Intimate Inequalities: The State of American Families
634S. Making Social Policy
Visual and Media Studies
211S. Children and the Experience of Illness

Chinese
For courses in Chinese, see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 198.

Civic Engagement and Social Change
Eric Mlyn, Director; Professor Malone, Associate Director; Leslie Parkins, Assistant Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The objectives of this certificate program are two-fold: to promote an understanding of the historical, social, 

and intellectual foundations of civic life and social change; and, to offer an educational pathway that helps students 
connect historical and contemporary scholarship to their co-curricular experiences working with organizations 
and communities that promote civic participation and social change. Housed in the Program in Education and 
overseen by a Faculty Advisory Committee representing several academic disciplines, the certificate provides 



 Civic Engagement and Social Change (CESC)236

students with an intellectual framework for their own active participation in civic life. The certificate’s required 
and elective courses will engage students in a critical examination of the concepts of citizenship including political 
and non-political participation in civic activities, social movements, social change, diversity, democratic practices, 
and the public good. 

The certificate requires students to satisfactorily complete a gateway course (students can choose to enroll 
in Civic Engagement and Social Change 201S, Political Science 114, Public Policy 263, or Public Policy 283), two 
elective courses, two thematically related co-curricular experiences (one of more than 150 hours and a second of 
more than 300 hours), a public-facing ePortfolio, and a capstone seminar. Through this structured sequence of 
learning experiences, students will examine their own civic engagement in light of what they have learned about 
the various ways citizens organize themselves to create social change and to interact with public and private 
organizations to impact the rules, norms, and laws that affect their lives. 

Sequencing is an important feature of the certificate. Students should declare their intention to pursue this 
certificate as early as possible, but no later than the end of the drop/add period of the fall semester of their junior 
year. Students must complete the gateway course no later than the first semester it is offered following the student’s 
first thematically related learning experience. Also, neither of the two electives may count toward the certificate if 
it is taken before the gateway course. Finally, the capstone course may not be taken until the gateway course, two 
elective courses and the two thematically related experiences are completed. Specific program requirements and 
further information may be obtained from the Director or Associate Director. 

Courses in Civic Engagement and Social Change (CESC)
201. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Introduction to key concepts, theories, and critiques of civic engagement and social change, with a focus on 
competing notions of democratic citizenship. Examination of voluntarism, philanthropy, community service, 
political participation, social activism and other forms of community engagement. Critical reflection on ethical 
issues related to community engagement and social change, including critiques of progressivism and service. 
Students will also be asked to apply these various approaches to pressing social issues of our time, such as 
income inequality, environmental justice, education reform and gender and race equality. Instructor: Mlyn. 
One course. C-L: Education 201, Public Policy 203, Political Science 213, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 201
201S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Introduction to key concepts, theories, and critiques of civic engagement and social change, with a focus on 
competing notions of democratic citizenship. Examination of voluntarism, philanthropy, community service, 
political participation, social activism and other forms of community engagement. Critical reflection on ethical 
issues related to community engagement and social change, including critiques of progressivism and service. 
Students will also be asked to apply these various approaches to pressing social issues of our time, such as 
income inequality, environmental justice, education reform and gender and race equality. Consent of instructor 
is required. Instructor: Mlyn. One course. C-L: Education 201S, Public Policy 206S, Political Science 213S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 201S, Human Rights
283. Ethics in an Unjust World. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 283
391. Independent Study. Directed readings in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project on a previously approved topic. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. For students enrolled in the Civic Engagement and 
Social Change Certificate Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic 
Engagement. CZ, EI The fourth course in the Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change is a capstone 
seminar. Students will connect the intellectual themes and scholarly knowledge they have developed in the 
gateway and elective courses with the learning that has occurred in the two thematically related co-curricular 
experiences—to create theoretically informed praxis in the spirit of this experiential certificate. The capstone 
course will require students to critically re-examine strands introduced in the gateway course with the goal of 
encouraging students to determine in what ways concepts are illustrated in their co-curricular experiences. 
Prerequisite: CESC 201S. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Mlyn. One course. C-L: Education 401S, 
Political Science 401S, Public Policy 401S, Study of Ethics 401S, Ethics Elective



Classical Studies (CLST)  237

Civil and Environmental Engineering
For courses in civil and environmental engineering, see page 827.

Classical Studies
Professor Johnson, Chair; Professor González, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Forte, Janan, and 
Johnson; Associate Professors Atkins, Ginsberg, González, Sosin, and Woods; Assistant Professors Jiménez, Mor-
gan, and Weiberg; Assistant Research Professor Casias; Lecturing Fellow Crews; Professors Emeriti Antonaccio, 
Boatwright, Davis, Newton, Rigsby, and Stanley

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Courses in the Department of Classical Studies offer the chance to bring to life the past of ancient Greece 

and Rome, through exploration of their languages, literature, history, philosophy, art, material culture, and more. 
The department offers courses in Latin, Greek, and classical studies; two majors (classical languages and classical 
civilization); and four minors (Greek, Latin, classical civilizations, and classical archaeology). This rich field of 
study invites serious engagement with the complexity of the past and evaluation of its place in the present. In 
grappling with the classical pasts, students develop the tools and habits for thinking critically across space, time, 
culture, and disciplinary boundaries.

The requirements of the two majors convey the disciplinary coherence of the field, yet are flexible enough to 
allow students to develop their own interests as they progress through their course of study.

Courses in Classical Studies (CLST) 
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics in classical literature and/or art and archaeology vary each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
107. Roman Art and Archaeology. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 107
141. Age of Warriors: Pre-Roman and Italian Archaeology. CCI, CZ Classical archaeology is often 
centered on Roman and Greek civilizations, but can overlook other exciting, formative struggles. What were the 
earliest civilizations peopling the Italian peninsula in the first millennium BCE? This was an age of conflicts, 
battles, social change and dramatic events involving individuals and ethnic groups. It was an age of warriors and 
wars, weapons and armies, contending for the political and religious power of city-states, nations and territories. 
Among them, the Etruscan civilization was the one able to deeply influence the Roman and other Italic societies 
for several generations. Instructor: Forte. One course.
144. Principles of Archaeology. CCI, CZ, EI Introduction to the many disciplines of archaeology, using a 
survey of cultures and civilizations to explain archaeological techniques, methods, theory, results, and ethics. 
Instructor: Jiménez or staff. One course.
151. Classical Etymology: The Greek and Latin Roots of English. CCI, SS Studies the Greek and Latin 
roots of English words, and the adoption and evolution of English derivatives from Greek and Latin. Focuses on 
lexical analysis and vocabulary building, with attention to sociopolitical dimensions of word development and 
language use. Instructor: Crews. One course.
170FS. Liberty and Equality: Ancient and Modern Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Examines the 
democratic values of liberty and equality in Greek, Roman, and American political thought. Are democracy 
and liberty allies or foes? What is the relationship between liberty and equality? Is freedom possible under 
non-democratic regimes? Is individual liberty protected by equal and inalienable human rights? What is the 
relationship between individual liberties and aspirations for a good and just society? Why have some democratic 
societies embraced imperialism or slavery? Readings drawn from Aristophanes, Thucydides, Plato, Aristotle, 
Polybius, Cicero, Livy, Tacitus, Jefferson, Madison, Hamilton, Lincoln, London, Vonnegut, Hauerwas, among 
others. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Atkins. One 
course. C-L: Political Science 170FS, Study of Ethics 170FS
171S. Birth of the West: Thinking about the Greek Origins of Western Civilization. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Have you ever wondered about the many ways in which those in the West look back to the Greeks for the 
origins of civilization? There is a breathtaking array of such “beginnings” claimed by the Greeks, such as the 
invention of the alphabet, the first staged drama, the rise of formal logic and philosophy, democracy, realistic 



 Classical Studies (CLST) 238

sculpture, the conventions of writing history (historiography), and much else. In this course, we will think 
through these claims to cultural “origins,” seeking both to learn and understand the narratives passed down 
to us, and to thoughtfully interrogate those narratives. An introductory course: no prior knowledge required. 
Instructor: Johnson. One course. C-L: History 150S
181S. Greek Civilization. CCI, CZ The culture of the ancient Greeks from the Bronze Age to Alexander 
the Great: art, literature, history, philosophy, and religion. Not open to students who have had, or are taking, 
Classical Studies 283. Instructor: Staff. One course.
182S. Roman Civilization. CCI, CZ The culture of the ancient Romans from their beginnings to 
Constantine: art, literature, history, philosophy, and religion. Not open to students who have taken or are taking 
Classical Studies 284. Instructor: Staff. One course.
199. Archaeology of Migration: Greeks, Roman, Egyptians, Etruscans. CCI, CZ, SS Since before 
recorded history massive migrations have moved people throughout the world, creating hybrid identities 
and new societies and destroying old ones. This course examines migration in the Mediterranean among 
classical Greeks, Romans, Etruscans and Egyptians in the first millennium BCE. We explore historical factors, 
such as famine, overpopulation, and violent conquest and enslavement, and we consider recognized and 
unacknowledged consequences. After introduction to mapping technologies, we end by mapping various ancient 
migrations and their effects. Taught online. Instructor: Forte. One course.
204. Ancient and Medieval Epic. ALP, CCI Reading the major epics of antiquity in translation (Gilgamesh, 
Homer’s Iliad and Odyssey, Vergil’s Aeneid) and the European Middle Ages (Beowulf, Song of Roland, 
Dante’s Inferno), emphasizing the changing definition and concept of the hero. Instructor: González, Janan, or 
Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 303
206. Classics of Page and Screen: Exploring the Iconic in Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Exploration of ancient, medieval and modern conceptualizations of good and evil as found in the iconic 
heroes, villains, and buffoons of literature and film; film and literature as windows onto their contemporary 
historical contexts, and as indicators of social values, debates, and limits. Instructor: Janan. One course.
208. Ancient Myth. ALP, CCI, CZ Myths are humanity’s longest-lasting and most powerful stories. They 
shape our understanding of transitions and crises, and explore the boundaries between right and wrong, life 
and death, and the natural and the supernatural. They can also be playful, exuberant, and highly entertaining. 
This course introduces students to the myths of Greece and Rome, with comparative material drawn from the 
Hebrew Bible and other ancient texts. Throughout the course we will also think about the role of mythology 
today, and the way we use stories to come to terms with ourselves and our world. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Theater Studies 228, Religion 208
240L. Virtual Museums: Theories and Methods of Twenty-First-Century Museums. ALP, R, 
STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 332L; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 305L
241. Etruscans: Myth, Archaeology and Civilization. CCI, CZ The Etruscans were a pre-Indo-European 
population living in the Italic peninsula in the first millennium BCE. One of the most important and fascinating 
civilizations of the ancient world, which deeply influenced the Classical world and the Mediterranean basin. 
The class involves archaeological studies and comparative analyses of pre-urban and urban settlements, the 
necropoleis, art, art history, iconography and archaeological remains of the Etruscan and pre-Roman Italic 
world. Use of digital technologies for the study of Etruscan cities and landscape with a specific focus on the 
Etruscan city of Vulci. Not open to students who have taken Classical Studies 198. Instructor: Forte. One course. 
C-L: Art History 196
243S. Representations of Women in the Classical World. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see 
Visual and Media Studies 209S
246. Roman Archaeology: Origins to Empire. ALP, CCI, CZ This course surveys the Roman archaeology 
of Italy from the 5th century BCE to the end of the reign of Augustus (14 CE). It analyzes the role of material 
culture in the creation of social structures through the study of urbanism, landscapes, ancient technology, rituals 
and identity in Italy and the early Roman provinces. Instructor: Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 246
248. Art and Archaeology of Ancient Athens. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 208
250. The Art of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 210



Classical Studies (CLST)  239

262. Ancient Athletics. ALP, CCI, CZ The athletic festivals of the ancient Greeks and Romans are among 
the most enduring legacies of the Classical world, and provide a particularly accessible introduction to the study 
of antiquity. Through examination of literary and historiographical sources (in translation) and of the material 
remains at the ancient sites, this course introduces students to the origins and development of the major athletic 
contests (especially the Olympic Games), the methods and practicalities of ancient training, and the changing 
role of athletics in ancient and modern education, religion, and politics. We end with a survey of the modern 
Olympic movement, from the nineteenth century to the present. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 231
264. Greek and Roman Religion. CCI, CZ Topics in Greek and Roman religion from the Bronze Age 
through the rise of Christianity, based on literary, documentary, and archaeological sources. Coverage within 
the chronological boundaries via survey, case-studies, or a combination of both. Topics might include the 
relationship of myth and ritual, hero cult, mysteries, festivals, interface between philosophy and religion, 
“public” and “private” religion, religious “imports” and exoticism, architecture and landscape of religion. 
Instructor: González or Staff. One course. C-L: Religion 215
266. Gender and Sexuality in the Ancient World. ALP, CCI, CZ Class examines ancient erotic poetry, 
prose, material evidence (e.g., vase paintings) to explicate gender as a cultural sign: sexuality as a language in 
which other business is transacted. “Obscene” literature, paintings, etc. evidence how the ancients constructed 
men, women, sexuality—but also social hierarchies, national prerogatives, and identity. Instructor: Janan. One 
course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 266
271. History of Ancient Philosophy. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 203
272A. The Birth of Reason in Ancient Greece. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 236A
275. Democracy: Ancient and Modern. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Examines democracy in its ancient and modern 
forms, with special attention to Athenian and American democracy. Does modern democracy fulfill the promise 
of ancient democracy, or betray its fundamental tenets? Topics may include freedom, equality, and rights; 
democratic institutions; citizenship; rhetoric; democratic knowledge and decision-making; foreign policy; 
corruption; religion; and hope. Instructor: Atkins. One course. C-L: Political Science 211, History 234, Study of 
Ethics 275
278. Roman Political Thought and Its Modern Legacy. CCI, CZ, EI Why does Rome still capture the 
imagination of modern political commentators and theorists? This course examines Roman political thought 
as it was conceived under the Republic, reimagined under the Empire, and transformed by Christianity. Topics 
may include the Roman constitution, liberty, equality, property, slavery, rights, citizenship, civil religion, 
political corruption, rhetoric, imperialism, just war theory, and cosmopolitanism. Instructor: Atkins. One 
course. C-L: History 262, Study of Ethics 276, Political Science 278
283. Greek History. CCI, CZ The political and intellectual history of the Greeks from earliest times to 
the death of Alexander the Great. Not open to students who have had, or are taking, Classical Studies 181S. 
Instructor: Sosin, Johnson, or Staff. One course. C-L: History 230
284. Roman History. CCI, CZ From the founding of Rome by Romulus to the founding of Constantinople by 
Constantine: social, cultural, and political history. Not open to students who have taken or are taking Classical 
Studies 182S. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 233
290. Special Topics in Classical Studies. Aimed at first and second-year students. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Classical Studies. Topics vary by 
semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Classical Studies. Topics vary by 
semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project containing significant analysis 
and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; for seniors, the 



 Classical Studies (CLST) 240

paper or project may partially fulfill the requirements for graduation with distinction. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
299L. Introduction to Landscape Archaeology and Cultural Landscapes. CCI, CZ From hunter-
gatherer to post-modern network societies, human, animal and plant life and evolution depend on the complex 
relations and affordances of landscape and environment. Climate change, geomorphology, natural resources, 
land use, and human settlements are complex and inter-related phenomena that invite multidisciplinary 
study with different technologies and methodologies. Comparative research on paleo-environments, ancient 
landscapes, and societies are crucial for understanding the future of landscape and environment. Instructor: 
Forte. One course. C-L: Science & Society 299L, Science & Society
304. Drama of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ Reading in translation selected tragedies (Aeschylus, 
Sophocles, Euripides, Seneca) and comedies (Aristophanes, Menander, Plautus, Terence) with emphasis on 
political, social, and cultural developments, contemporary theatrical practice, and later influence on world 
theater and other media. Instructor: Weiberg or Ginsberg. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 227, Visual and 
Media Studies 240
308. Greek and Roman Law. CCI, CZ Law of Greece and Rome from the birth of the Greek polis and 
Rome’s Twelve Tables to the Digest of Justinian. Coverage within the chronological boundaries via survey, case-
studies, or a combination of both. Topics might include murder trials, political trials, civil law and procedure, 
family law, delict, religious “laws,” oratory, and others. Instructor: Atkins or Sosin. One course. C-L: History 
240, Political Science 381
312S. Ancient Greek Notions of Justice. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines constructions of “justice” in ancient 
Greek literature and culture and explores their reception and modern significance. Instructor: González. One 
course.
316S. Self-Knowledge and the Pursuit of Wisdom. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI This course looks to the Classical 
Tradition for guidance on how to grow in wisdom through a deeper knowledge of the self in relation to others. 
Students explore questions of personal meaning and significance by reading literary, philosophical, and 
biographical classics of the Western Tradition. Focus on wisdom and fulfillment in life, and the means for 
attaining them through friendship and community. Topics include: wisdom, conscience, happiness, justice, 
passion, moderation, guilt, shame, excellence, character, purpose, prudence, and choice. Authors may include 
Homer, Vergil, Sophocles, Plato, Aristotle, Epictetus, Seneca, Marcus Aurelius, St. Paul, Augustine, Calvin, 
Hobbes, Spinoza. Instructor: González. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 316S
322. Jesus and the Gospels. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 351; also C-L: Ethics Elective
340A. Rome: History of the City. ALP, CCI, CZ On-site study of the development of Rome’s urban plan 
and its major monuments through the ages; the influence of the ancient Republic and Empire, the Papacy, and 
the modern secular state; change and continuity in artistic forms and daily life. (Summer program in Italy.) 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 209A, History 238A
341A. The Ancient City. CCI Examination of the archaeological monuments of Rome and other Italian 
sites, as well as literary sources, inscriptions, and works of art. Consent required. Taught in Rome as part of 
the Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies program. Students must register for both 341A-1 and 341A-2. 
Instructor: Staff.
341A-1. Art and Archaeology. ALP, CCI Instructor: Staff (Study Abroad). One course.
341A-2. Political, Social, and Cultural Context. CCI, CZ Instructor: Staff (Study Abroad). One course.
343SA. Conservation and Management of the Material Heritage. CCI, CZ This course offers 
theoretical and practical experience in the management of cultural heritage, with special reference to Roman 
art and architecture in Rome. Students live the experience of being a conservator of archaeological items, 
monuments, and sites, and a manager of cultural and material heritage. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art 
History 343SA
344. Early Greek Archaeology: From the Fall of Mycenae to the Persian Wars. ALP, CCI, CZ Greek 
material culture in its social, economic, and historical contexts, 1200 to 480 BCE. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Art History 206
346S. Classical Sculpture. ALP, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Art History 340S



Classical Studies (CLST)  241

348. Classical Greek Archaeology, Archaic to Classical. ALP, CCI, CZ The archaeology of the Greek 
citystate including its historical context. Emphasis on both themes (sanctuaries, death and burial, warfare) and 
the ability to understand material culture in context. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 207
352. The Aegean Bronze Age. ALP, CCI, CZ Survey of Greek prehistory, from the final Neolithic to the end 
of the era in ca. 1200 BCE. Issues to be considered include the historicity of the Trojan War, the relationship of 
this period to later Greek history and cultural identity. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 205
354. Roman Spectacle. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 334
357. Roman Coinage: The Materiality of an Ancient Economy. ALP, CCI, CZ The scholarly study 
of Roman coinage, focusing on historical trends from the late Republic to the early Empire, 3rd c. BCE-2nd 
c. CE. Topics of particular attention will be: introduction of coinage in Rome and the provinces; historically 
contextualizing the making, using, and losing of money (how and why coins are produced, exchanged, buried, 
counterfeited, even used in religious rituals). Coins as works of art—but common, widely circulating works of art 
produced by governments, often used to spread propaganda about state goals or national identity. Instructor: 
Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 347
360. The History of the Book. ALP, CZ, R The history of the “book” as physical object from its earliest 
forms (clay tablets, papyrus scrolls) through to texts in the digital age. Introduction to manuscript and early 
print culture in the West – scribes, scripts and book production. The role of the book in different cultures, and 
in intellectual history. Hands-on experience with, and study of materials in the Rubenstein Rare Book and 
Manuscript Library. Instructor: Woods. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 346, Information 
Science + Studies 360, History 367
364. Ancient Science and Technology. CZ, STS Development of scientific thought and technological 
innovation in the ancient Near East, Greece, and Rome. Topics might include the rise of scientific thought, as 
against myth; impact of scientific and technological developments on Greek and Roman society and culture; 
history of medicine; history of mathematics; military technology. Instructor: González. One course. C-L: History 
236
366. Inventing Sickness: The Science and Practice of Medicine in Ancient Greece. CZ, EI, SS, 
STS Exploration of conceptual developments that led to the emergence of medicine in ancient Greece as a 
science and an art and as a contentious subject of speculative discourse. We will situate these developments 
firmly within their corresponding cultural, intellectual, and social contexts. Concepts examined include: notions 
of disease; competing views of human anatomy and physiology; natural versus supernatural causation; the 
ethics of medical (non-)treatment and research; the rise of the doctor; dietetic, pharmacological, and surgical 
practices; the doctor-patient relationship. Instructor: Gonzalez. One course. C-L: History 365
368S. The Afterlife of Classics. ALP, CCI, CZ The appropriation of classical antiquity by later cultures 
and its reinterpretation by different audiences and for different purposes, with emphasis on the use of antiquity 
in the construction of social/cultural identities. Topics may include examination of various “classical revivals” 
in the arts, e.g., architecture, opera, epic; classics and ancient history in film; the use and misuse of ancient 
political thought and structures to shape and interpret modern institutions and historical discourse. Instructor: 
Atkins, Janan, Woods, or Staff. One course.
371. Aristotle. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 317
374S. Aristotle and Neuroscience. CCI, EI, SS Explores the relevance of Aristotle’s thought, especially 
his treatise “On the Soul,” to understanding the research projects and foundations of cognitive psychology 
and neuroscience and the relationship between them. Brings Aristotle into dialogue with modern scholarship. 
Topics include: the use of hylomorphism and functionalism; the nature of perception, representation (including 
knowledge and belief), memory, emotion, and pain; desire, intentionality, and the relationship of perception to 
action; consciousness; folk psychology, inference, and explanatory reduction; the self; and moral psychology. 
Prior knowledge of Aristotelian philosophy or neuroscience is not required. Instructor: Gonzalez. One course. 
C-L: Neuroscience 274S, Study of Ethics 274S
480S. Capstone Seminars in Classical Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W Specific aspects of the history, 
art, and literature of classical Greece and Rome. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; some knowledge of 
classical studies and history desirable, but not strictly necessary; research paper required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Political Science 480S, History 480S



 Classical Studies (CLST) 242

480S-1. Capstone Research Seminars in Classical Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Specific aspects of the 
history, art, and literature of classical Greece and Rome. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; some 
knowledge of classical studies and history desirable, but not strictly necessary. Not open to students who have 
previously taken Classical Studies 480S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Special Topics in Classical Studies. Aimed at third- and fourth-year students. Topic. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project containing significant analysis 
and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; for seniors, the 
paper or project may partially fulfill the requirements for graduation with distinction. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
524S. Greek History from the Bronze Age to the Fifth Century BCE. CZ Study of Greek history from 
the Bronze Age to the fifth century BCE via survey, case-studies, or a combination of both. Offerings might 
include Fifth-century Greece, Archaic Greece, The Athenian Empire, Western Greeks, Ancient Democracy, vel 
sim. Instructor: Johnson or Sosin. One course. C-L: History 533S
528S. Greek History: Fifth through First Centuries BC. CZ Studies in later Greek History from the 
fifth through first centuries BC. Coverage within these chronological boundaries via survey, case-studies, or 
a combination of both. Offerings might include Fourth-century Greece, The Hellenistic World, Ptolemaic 
Egypt, vel sim. Instructor: Johnson or Sosin. One course. C-L: History 528S
532. The Roman Republic. CCI, CZ, R The rise of Rome, to its mastery of the Mediterranean; the political, 
social, and cultural consequences. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 516
532S. Roman History from Romulus to Augustus. CCI, CZ Study of Roman history from its earliest 
beginnings to the age of Augustus. Coverage via survey, case-studies, or a combination of both. Offerings might 
include The Roman Republic, Conflict of the Orders, Roman Revolution, vel sim. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: History 534S
536. The Roman Empire. CCI, CZ, R The foundation, consolidation, and transformation of Roman rule 
from Augustus to Diocletian. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 538
536S. Roman History from Augustus through Late Antiquity. CCI, CZ Study of Roman history from 
Augustus to the early medieval period via survey, case-studies, or a combination of both. Offerings might include 
The Roman Empire, The Julio-Claudians, The Second Sophistic, The Severans, The Third-Century Crisis, Late 
Antiquity, vel sim. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 539S
540S. Roman Coinage: The Materiality of the Roman Economy. CCI, CZ, R New trends in Roman 
numismatics (from the late Republic to the early Empire, 3rd c. BCE-2nd c. CE). Archaeology from coins. Barter, 
money and coinage. The introduction of coinage in Rome and the provinces. Making money (coin production), 
using money (monetary, non-monetary and ritual uses), losing money (coin circulation, hoards, single finds): 
contextual interpretations. Monetary systems: coins from Rome and coins from the provinces. Coinage and 
identity. False coinage. Instructor: Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 549S
541S. Greek Art and Society: Archaic to Classical. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Art History 
501S
542S. Greek Art: Hellenistic to Roman. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 502S
543S. The Archaeology of Death: Ritual and Social Structure in the Ancient World. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R Contextual study of material culture linked to funerary practices and traditions in the ancient Greek or Roman 
world. Topics may include funerary rituals, the ritualization of space around cities and in the countryside; 
ancestor cult and ancestor representation; monumental and not so monumental tombs, grave offerings and 
grave assemblages; public personas and funerary iconography: gender, age, occupation. Death in Greece/Rome 
and death in the provinces. Instructor: Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 545S



Classical Studies (CLST)  243

544L. Introduction to Digital Archaeology. CZ, R, STS Course studies the radical changes that new 
methodologies and technologies have wrought in archaeology. Remote sensing technologies, digital tools, virtual 
reality systems for data recording, documentation, simulation and communication of archaeological data have 
profoundly changed archaeological field operations. Course surveys the state of the art in: techniques of digital 
recording and digital documentation; GIS and remote sensing; international case studies in digital archaeology; 
virtual reality and virtual simulation; Web and digital publications. Instructor: Forte. One course. C-L: Art 
History 547L, Information Science + Studies 544L
546S. Ancient Spain and Portugal: The Roman Provinces of the Iberian Peninsula. ALP, CCI, 
CZ Examines how Roman provinces were created and incorporated into the Roman Empire. Investigates traces 
in ancient visual and material culture of bonds between provinces and Rome. Approaches complex issues of 
colonialism, change and continuity connected with Roman conquest of new territories in the Mediterranean. 
Examines monuments and new archaeological data available from Roman Spain and Portugal, selected samples 
from other Roman provinces. Instructor: Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 503S
547S. Roman Provincial Archaeology: The West. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Investigates ancient visual and 
material culture for information about relations between Rome’s western provinces (especially Spain) and 
Rome, from initial, brutal conquest through incorporation. Within an archaeological context we address 
complex issues, such as colonialism and indigenous change and continuity, as evidence in Rome’s conquest of 
new territories in the Mediterranean. Examines monuments and new archaeological data available from Roman 
Spain, as well as selected samples from other Roman provinces of the western Mediterranean (Britain, Gaul, and 
others). Instructor: Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 520S
550. Principles of Pre-Roman and Etruscan Archaeology. CCI, CZ This course is about the study of 
one of the most important and fascinating civilizations of ancient Italy and of the pre-Indoeuropean world, 
which deeply influenced the Classical world and the Mediterranean basin. It will involve archaeological study 
and comparative analyses of pre-urban and urban settlements, the necropoleis, art, art history, language, 
iconography and cultural assets and archaeological remains of the Etruscan and pre-Roman Italic worlds. 
Ultimately, the archaeological interpretation of Etruscans and other ancient societies in the first millennium 
BCE will raise new research questions in the field of Mediterranean and classical archaeology. Instructor: Forte. 
One course.
551S. Principles of Roman Archaeology. CCI, CZ, R Survey of the material culture of the Roman world, 
from the creation of the first provinces in the Late Republic to the end of the principate under Diocletian (late 
3rd c. BCE–late 3rd c. CE). The course analyzes the archaeology of Rome and the provinces from a thematic 
perspective. Subjects include imperialism and colonization, rural and city landscapes, housing and households, 
necropoleis, the ancient economy, social identities (such as gender and age) and social structure (slavery). The 
course addresses various theoretical models to understand, among other topics, the creation and the decline of 
the empire and incorporates, when possible, hands-on work with artifacts at the Nasher Museum. Instructor: 
Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 553S
552. Greek Archaeology Survey, Part 1. CCI, CZ The first of a two-part intensive survey of the material 
culture of the Ancient Greek world in the early period, focusing on the Iron Age and Archaic periods (ca. 1000-
480 BC). The course will examine the archaeological evidence for civic, rural, sacred, funerary and domestic 
activities and will consider the development of architectural, sculptural, and ceramic forms throughout 
the period in order to understand how material culture both reflects and shapes cultural identity. Various 
methodological approaches and theoretical models will be introduced, and the distinction of Greek culture from 
others in the Eastern Mediterranean will be interrogated. Instructor: Morgan. One course.
553. Greek Archaeology Survey, Part 2. CCI, CZ The second of a two-part intensive survey of the material 
culture of the Ancient Greek world, this time focusing in the Classical and Hellenistic periods (ca. 480-31 BC). 
The course will examine the archaeological evidence for civic, rural, sacred, funerary and domestic activities and 
will consider the development of architectural, sculptural, and ceramic forms throughout the period in order 
to understand how material culture both reflects and shapes cultural identity. Special attention will be paid to 
the definition of “Classical” Greek culture and its re-definition in the Hellenistic period. Various methodological 
approaches and theoretical models will be introduced. Instructor: Morgan. One course.
556SL. Roman Topography: Urban Life and Cityscapes in Ancient Rome. CCI, CZ, R, SS Advanced 
undergraduate and graduate seminar on ancient Rome’s great monuments and humble buildings, public spaces 



 Greek (GREEK)244

and streets, and infrastructure and natural features used by and influencing its inhabitants and visitors from 
1st c. BCE to 4th c. CE. We turn to traditional topographical research and new visual technologies alike. Survey 
of ancient Rome’s topographical data and methodologies, followed by student team projects. Course plus lab. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 560SL, Visual and Media Studies 570SL
558S. Live Images: Ancient and Medieval Representations of the Divine. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One 
course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 533S; also C-L: Religion 552S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
507S
560. Etruscan Cities. CCI, CZ Focuses on concept and definition of city in Etruscan society and its socio-
political role in territorial organization. Main topics include pre-urban and urban development of Etruscan 
society, the first settlements, space and rituals, formation and development of Etruscan City States, cities and 
landscapes, cultural models between Greeks and Etruscans, colonies and emporia, transformations and changes 
in Roman times. Primary evidence for all the above will be visualization of material remains from antiquity. 
Instructor: Forte. One course. C-L: Art History 561
564S. Toleration, Freedom of Conscience, and Religious Liberty. CCI, CZ, EI, R Explores the 
ideas of toleration, freedom of conscience, and religious liberty through a careful study of philosophers 
and theologians in the Roman world, where arguments for these concepts first emerged. Also considers the 
important contributions of early modern political philosophers and discussions by contemporary theorists. 
Readings may include Cicero, Seneca, Epictetus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Lactantius, St. Augustine, Spinoza, Locke, 
Rousseau, Roger Williams, Jefferson, Nussbaum, and Forst. Instructor: Atkins. One course. C-L: Political 
Science 588S, Religion 564S, History 564S
568. The Legacy of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ The reception of classical antiquity—its literature, 
art and architecture—in subsequent ages, from the early medieval period to the present day. Instructor: Woods. 
One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 648
571S. Ancient Political Philosophy. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 575S; also C-L: 
Philosophy 571, Ethics Elective
572S. Plato. CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 511S
573S. Aristotle. CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 512S
580S. Proseminar: Introduction to Classical Studies. Credit/no credit grading only. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
590S. Special Topics in Greek Art. One course. C-L: see Art History 590S-1
590SL. Special Topics in Roman Archaeology. Studies in Roman art and archaeology on focused themes, 
or on particular assemblages or problems. Offerings might include Art and Architecture of Pompeii, Roman 
Portraiture vel sim. Includes laboratory component. Instructors: Forte or Jiménez. One course. C-L: Art History 
590SL
690S. Special Topics in Classical Studies. Topic varies from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff.
691. Directed Reading and Research. Credit to be arranged. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

Greek

Courses in Greek (GREEK)
101. Elementary Greek. FL Structure of the language (grammatical forms, syntax, vocabulary, and 
pronunciation); introduction to reading. Instructor: Johnson or Weiberg. One course.
102. Elementary Greek. FL Second half of Greek 101,102. Prerequisite: Greek 101. Instructor: Johnson or 
Weiberg. One course.
111. Intensive First-Year Greek. FL Intensive introduction to ancient Greek language and culture. Includes 
structure of the language (grammatical forms, syntax, vocabulary, and pronunciation) and introduction to 
reading. Combines in one semester the work of Greek 101-102. Instructor: Johnson. Two courses.
203. Intermediate Greek. CZ, FL Readings in classical Attic prose literature. Prerequisite: Greek 102 or 



Greek (GREEK) 245

equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
203A-1. Intermediate Greek. FL Review of grammar, reading of selected texts. Taught at the Intercollegiate 
Center for Classical Studies in Rome. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
252A-1. Advanced Intermediate Greek. FL Review of grammar, reading of selected texts. Taught at the 
Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies in Rome. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
252S. Advanced Intermediate Greek. CZ, FL Introduction to ancient Greek poetry. Recommended 
prerequisite: Greek 203 or the equivalent. Instructor: Johnson, González. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
292. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301A-1. Advanced Greek. ALP, CCI, FL Readings vary. Taught at the Intercollegiate Center for Classical 
Studies in Rome. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301AS-2. Advanced Greek. ALP, CCI, FL Readings vary. Taught at the Intercollegiate Center for Classical 
Studies in Catania. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
304S. Greek Historians. ALP, CZ, EI, FL Historians. Readings in Greek historians illuminating key 
themes, periods, historiographical conventions, especially historiography’s role as font of ancient moral and 
ethical exempla. Authors might include Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Diodorus Siculus, vel sim. 
Must have 2 years of Greek (or equivalent). Instructors: Johnson, Sosin or Staff. One course.
308S. Greek Philosophy. CZ, EI, FL Philosophy. Investigation into key trends, themes, developments in 
Greek Philosophy, especially moral and political, through readings from the Pre-Socratic philosophers, Plato, 
Aristotle, Epicurus, and/or others. Must have 2 years of Greek (or equivalent). Instructor: González or Staff. One 
course.
312S. Greek Oratory and Rhetoric. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Oratory/Rhetoric. Exploration of the theory and 
practice of ancient oratory and rhetoric, especially as regards negotiation of power through public speech. 
Includes readings from Antiphon, Andocides, Lysias, Isocrates, Isaeus, Demosthenes, Gorgias, Alcidamas, 
Aristotle, Ps.-Longinus, Demetrios’ On Style, and/or others. Must have 2 years of Greek (or equivalent). 
Instructor: Johnson, González, Sosin, or Staff. One course.
324S. Greek Epic. ALP, CCI, FL Epic. Readings in Greek epic, with attention to language, meter, oral 
poetics, characterization, narrative structure, ancient and modern interpretation, the epic tradition beyond 
Greece and Rome, epic poems as codifiers of socially constructed cultural norms. Authors and works might 
include Homer, Hesiod, and the Homeric Hymns. Must have 2 years of Greek (or equivalent). Instructor: 
González or Staff. One course.
328S. Lyric and Hellenistic Poetry. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Greek lyric and Hellenistic poetry. Possible 
authors and works include selected fragments from the major lyric poets, Pindar, Theocritus and/or others, 
particularly as they illuminate construction, testing, examination of Greek cultural identity. Must have 2 years of 
Greek (or equivalent). Instructor: Weiberg. One course.
332S. Greek Drama. ALP, EI, FL Reading and interpretation of selected plays by Aeschylus, Sophocles, 
Euripides, Aristophanes, and Menander, with attention to language, meter, staging, characteristic themes and 
conventions, and especially the cultural context of ancient drama and its use as an instrument and venue of 
public ethical and political debate. Must have 2 years of Greek (or equivalent). Instructor: Weiberg. One course.
334S. Ancient Greek Scholarship: G(r)eeks on Greek. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Team-based translation 
(and web publication) of ancient encyclopedias, lexica, scholia, commentaries, and other ancient scholarly 
works; most have not been translated into a modern language, so that the work of this class is an immediate, 
compelling, and citable contribution to scholarship. Students should have 4 semesters of college Greek (or 
equivalent). Ambitious students with less preparation should contact the professor; accommodation may be 
possible. Instructor: Sosin. One course.



 Greek (GREEK)246

344S. Greek Novel. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings in the Greek novel with attention to genre, distinctive 
themes, narrative structure and techniques, characterization, and reception. Works include Achilles 
Tatius’ Leucippe and Clitophon, Chariton’s Chaereas and Callirhoe, Heliodorus’ Aethiopica, Longus’ Daphnis 
and Chloe, and Xenophon’s Habrocomes and Anthia. Prerequisite: Greek 101, 102, 203, and 204 (or 
equivalent). Instructor: González or staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and Director of Undergraduate Studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project containing significant analysis 
and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; for seniors, the 
paper or project may partially fulfill the requirements for graduation with distinction. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
504. Historians. ALP, CCI, FL Investigation of the Greek concept and practice of writing history from the 
Atthidographers to Agathias, with attention to key themes, periods, historiographical conventions. Authors and 
works might include Herodotus, Thucydides, Xenophon, Polybius, Diodorus Siculus, Arrian, Appian, Eusebius, 
Procopius, Agathias. Instructor: Johnson, Sosin, or Staff. One course.
508S. Greek Philosophy. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings of philosophical works (e.g. fragments of the pre-
Socratics, Plato’s Dialogues, Aristotle’s treatises). Prerequisite: Successful completion of at least one 300-level 
Greek course, or equivalent, or approval of instructor. Instructor: Johnson, González, or staff. One course.
512S. Greek Rhetoric and Oratory. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings of rhetorical speeches and treatises 
(e.g. Demosthenes, Isocrates, Dio Chrysostom, Libanius, Plato’s Gorgias, Aristotle’s Rhetoric, Rhetorica ad 
Alexandrum); focus on oratory in action, rhetoric as academic discipline or combination of both. Prerequisite: 
Successful completion of at least one 300-level Greek course or equivalent, or approval of instructor. Instructor: 
Sosin or staff. One course.
516S. Ancient Greek Literary Criticism. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings from ancient Greek literary 
criticism (e.g. Aristophanes’ Frogs, Aristotle’s Rhetoric, Ps.-Longinus, Demetrius, Dionysius of Halicarnassus, 
Hermogenes, Menander Rhetor); from ancient grammarians (e.g. Aristarchus of Samothrace); from scholia 
(e.g. to Homer or to Pindar); and from authors, works, and trends in Greek literature under the Roman Empire. 
Recommended prerequisite: successful completion of at least one 300-level Greek course or equivalent. 
Instructor: Gonzalez or staff. One course.
520S. Greek Epic. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings in Greek epic, with attention to genre, language, meter, 
poetics, characterization, narrative structure, ancient and modern interpretations, traditions beyond Greece and 
Rome, epic poems as codifiers of socially constructed cultural norms, and examination of Greek cultural identity. 
Authors and works might include the Iliad, the Odyssey, Apollonius’ Argonautica, and/or the fragments of the 
epic cycle. Preqrequisite: Successful completion of at least one 300-level Greek course or equivalent, or approval 
of instructor. Instructor: González, Johnson, or staff. One course.
524S. Greek Lyric. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Greek Lyric, with attention to genre, language, meter, poetics, 
persona, ancient and modern interpretations, traditions beyond Greece and Rome, and examination of gender 
and cultural identity. Authors and works include selections from Sappho, Pindar, Bacchylides, Callimachus, 
Theocritus, the Greek Anthology, and others. Prerequisite: Successful completion of at least one 300-level Greek 
course, or equivalent, or approval of instructor. Instructor: González or staff. One course.
528. Drama. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL Readings in the dramatic and mimetic genres, especially Attic Tragedy 
and Comedy, with attention to language, meter, staging, characteristic themes and conventions, and especially 
the cultural context of ancient drama and its use as an instrument of public ethical and political debate. 
Authors may include Aeschylus, Sophocles, Euripides, Aristophanes, Menander, Sophron, Herodas, Lycophron. 
Instructor: Weiberg. One course.
534S. Ancient Greek Scholarship: G(r)eeks on Greek. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Team-based translation 
(and web publication) of ancient encyclopedias, lexica, scholia, commentaries, and other ancient scholarly 
works; most have not been translated into a modern language, so that the work of this class is an immediate, 
compelling, and citable contribution to scholarship. Instructor: Sosin. One course.



Latin (LATIN)  247

551. Elementary Greek for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. FL Structure of the language 
(grammatical forms, syntax, vocabulary, and pronunciation); introduction to reading. The course will feature 
additional work commensurate with the difference in expectations between undergraduate and graduate classes. 
This could involve additional reading, additional or differently scoped exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, 
additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as consistent with the goals of the class. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
552. Elementary Greek for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. FL Second half of Greek 
551-552. The course will feature additional work commensurate with the difference in expectations between 
undergraduate and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, additional or differently scoped 
exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as consistent with the 
goals of the class. Prerequisite: Greek 551. Instructor: Staff. One course.
580. Survey of Greek Literature. ALP, CCI, FL Instructor: Staff. One course.
582S. Greek Epigraphy. CZ, FL Introduction to the field of Greek Epigraphy, its history, methods, and 
place within the field of Classical Studies. Close attention to reading and translation of the variety of inscribed 
documentary and literary Greek. Instructor: Sosin. One course.
586S. Papyrology. CZ, FL Introduction to the field of Greek Papyrology, its history, methods and place 
within the field of Classical Studies. Close attention to reading and translation of the variety of documentary 
and/or literary papyrological Greek. Instructor: Johnson or Sosin. One course.
653. Intermediate Greek for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. CZ, FL Readings in 
classical Attic prose literature. The course will feature additional work commensurate with the difference in 
expectations between undergraduate and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, additional 
or differently scoped exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as 
consistent with the goals of the class. Prerequisite: Greek 552 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
654S. Advanced Intermediate Greek for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. CZ, 
FL Introduction to Athenian Drama. The course will feature additional work commensurate with the difference 
in expectations between undergraduate and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, additional 
or differently scoped exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as 
consistent with the goals of the class. Prerequisite: Greek 653. Instructor: Staff. One course.
691. Directed Reading and Research. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

Latin

Courses in Latin (LATIN) 
25. Introduction to Literature. This number represents course credit for a score of 4 or 5 on one or more of 
the College Board Advanced Placement tests in Latin. One course.
101. Elementary Latin. FL Study of the structure of the language (i.e., forms, vocabulary, syntax, and 
pronunciation); selected readings in prose and poetry. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Elementary Latin. FL Second half of Latin 101, 102. Prerequisite: Latin 101. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
203. Intermediate Latin. CZ, FL Readings in Latin literature: Cicero, Livy, Pliny the Younger, and Ovid. 
Review of grammar essentials accompanies students’ transition to reading some of the Latin greats. Instructor: 
González. One course.
203A-1. Intermediate Latin: Caesar’s Civil War. FL Review of grammar, reading of selected texts. Taught 
at the Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies in Rome. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
251. Refresher Latin for First-Year Students. FL This course is for first-year students who have had high 
school Latin and want or need a single refresher or preparatory course to transition to advanced (300-level) 
Latin. It includes grammar review and readings of real (unsimplified) prose and poetry texts not read in high 
school. Students must have at least 3 years of high school Latin (or the equivalent). Instructor: Crews or staff. 
One course.



 Latin (LATIN) 248

252. Advanced Intermediate Latin. CZ, FL The culture of Republican and Augustan Rome: selections 
from Cicero, Catullus, Vergil, Horace, Ovid or similar. Recommended prerequisite: Latin 203 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
252A-1. Advanced Intermediate Latin. FL Review of grammar, reading of selected texts from Cicero, 
Catullus, Vergil, Horace, Ovid or similar. Taught at the Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies in Rome. 
Consent required. Instructor: González. One course.
252A-2. Intermediate Latin: Verse (Study Abroad). FL Review of grammar, reading of selected texts. 
Taught at the Intercollegiate Center for Classical Studies, Catania. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
292. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R, W Individual research in a field of special interest under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; for 
seniors, the paper or project may partially fulfill the requirements for graduation with distinction. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301A-1. Advanced Latin. ALP, CCI, FL Readings vary. Taught at the Intercollegiate Center for Classical 
Studies in Rome. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302S. The Catilinarian Conspiracy. ALP, CZ, FL Examines the primary evidence surrounding Catiline’s 
plot to seize power at Rome. The affair involved some of Republican Rome’s greatest leaders—Cicero, Caesar, 
and Cato. But did one of history’s most famous conspiracies actually take place? Readings in Latin from Cicero 
and Sallust. Instructor: Atkins. One course.
304S. History and Biography. ALP, CZ, EI, FL Readings in one or more Roman historical works, 
illuminating key themes, periods, historiographical conventions, and especially ancient historiography’s role 
as font of moral and ethical exempla. Authors might include Caesar, Sallust, Livy, Tacitus, Velleius, Ammianus 
Marcellinus, Gregory of Tours, Suetonius, vel sim. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. 
Instructor: Ginsberg or Woods. One course.
305S. Roman Historians. ALP, CZ, FL Readings in one or more Roman historians, illuminating 
historiographical conventions and social, cultural, and political history. Authors might include Caesar, Livy, 
Tacitus, vel sim. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: Ginsberg or staff. One course.
307S. Philosophy in Rome. ALP, CZ, FL Study of literary works that incorporate philosophical content. 
Identification and evaluation of this content and of the interaction between literary setting and philosophical 
material. Instructor: Staff. One course.
308S. Latin Epistle. ALP, FL Readings in the form, function, history, and conventions of the Latin epistle. 
Material might range from the letters of Cicero, Cyprian, Augustine, Jerome, or medieval collections; from 
Seneca’s Letters to Lucilius to Ovid’s Heroides or Pliny’s correspondence with the Emperor Trajan. Students 
must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: Woods or staff. One course.
312S. Oratory/ Rhetoric. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Roman oratory and rhetoric. Focus on negotiation 
of power through public speech, definitions of identity, and public construction of cultural norms. Authors 
and works might include Cicero, Quintilian’s Institutes of Oratory, Tacitus’ Dialogue on Oratory, Seneca the 
Elder, selected speeches from Roman historians, vel sim. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. 
Instructor: Ginsberg, Janan, or staff. One course.
316S. Latin Novel. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Readings in Latin novel, with special attention to the form’s literary 
predecessors and its particular illumination of social, economic, and cultural features of the Roman world. 
Authors include Petronius and/or Apuleius. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: 
Janan or staff. One course.



Latin (LATIN)  249

320S. Ovid. ALP, FL Study of Ovid’s epic poem, the Metamorphoses, and/or his elegiac and exilic poetry. 
Translation and interpretation of these works in their literary and cultural contexts. Students must have two 
years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: Janan or staff. One course.
322S. Vergil. ALP, CCI, FL Study of Latin poetry, poetic syntax, meter, and style through readings from 
Vergil. Translation and interpretation of the Aeneid, the Georgics, and/or the Eclogues in their literary and 
cultural contexts. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: Janan or staff. One course.
324S. Latin Epic. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Roman Epic with attention to genre, language, meter, 
characterization, narrative structure, ancient and modern interpretation, the epic tradition in and beyond 
Greece and Rome, and the genre’s role in construction of cultural identity. Authors might include Vergil, Ovid, 
and Lucan. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: Ginsberg, Janan, or staff. One 
course.
326S. Latin Lyric. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Latin Lyric, with special attention to Roman responses to 
Greek literary traditions. Authors include Catullus, Horace, Statius, and others. Students must have two years of 
Latin or equivalent. Instructor: Janan or staff. One course.
328S. Elegy. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Latin Elegy, with special attention to the contemplation of human 
passions and vices within Roman culture and to Roman responses to Greek literary traditions. Authors might 
include Catullus, Tibullus, Propertius, Ovid, Horace, and Martial. Students must have two years of Latin or 
equivalent. Instructor: Janan or staff. One course.
332S. Drama. ALP, CCI, FL Readings in Roman Comedy and Tragedy. Special attention to Roman 
‘translation’ and reception of the Greek literary tradition before it; the genre’s illumination of social, economic, 
and cultural conditions; the form’s scrutiny of core cultural ideals. Authors include Plautus, Terence, and 
Seneca. Instructor: Ginsberg, Woods, or staff. One course.
336S. Satire. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL Readings in Roman Satire with special attention to the genre’s self-
critical posture and its ethical critique of Roman culture and the Latin literary tradition. Authors might include 
Lucilius, Horace, Persius, and Juvenal. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructors: Janan 
or staff. One course.
356S. Lucretius: On the Nature of Things. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL Study of the poetry and philosophy of 
Lucretius’ De rerum natura and of its influence on modern science and philosophy. Topics include Epicurean 
physics and ethics, free will, contingency and design in nature, death and human mortality, romantic love, 
religion, politics, and technological progress. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. Instructor: 
Atkins or staff. One course.
360S. Latin of the Late Roman Republic. ALP, FL Course designed to study literature of the Roman 
Republic’s final years, prior to transition to imperial rule. Texts will offer primary evidence of how Roman 
citizens viewed the radical changes taking place in Republican Rome, and how these created the social “stress 
fractures” that led to prolonged, bloody civil war, and finally to one-man rule. Readings could include such 
authors as Catullus, Cicero, Sallust, Caesar, Varro. Prerequisite: Latin 101, 102, 203, and 204 or the equivalent. 
Instructor: Janan. One course.
362S. Latin Panegyric: Praise and Blame in Latin Letters and Life. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL Readings 
in the peculiarly Roman tradition of praise for public figures, which often includes censure of others. Authors 
and works might include Cicero, Pliny the Younger, and the XII Panegyrici Latini, and readings will be in both 
prose and poetry. Attention will be paid to genre and to the widely varied historical contexts of our readings. 
Instructor: González. One course.
368S. Pliny and Martial. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Study of Roman history and society from Domitian to Trajan 
through the writings of Pliny the Younger and Martial. Emphasis on how literature and society construct and 
inform each other at critical moments in Roman history. Students must have two years of Latin or equivalent. 
Instructor: Janan or Woods. One course.
370S. Ancient Autobiography: Augustine’s Confessions. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL Readings in Latin and 
in English translation from the Confessions, St. Augustine’s intimate and influential spiritual autobiography. 
Important topics include the genre of ancient autobiography, the relation of Christianity to Greco-Roman 
literature and culture, the nature of good and evil, memory and time, human motivation, self-transformation, 



 Latin (LATIN) 250

and self-knowledge. Instructor: Atkins or staff. One course.
376S. Medieval Latin. ALP, CZ, FL Survey of medieval Latin literature, sampling authors and genres 
from Late Antiquity through the Italian Renaissance. Genres may include biblical literature, late ancient and 
medieval hymns, letters, medieval plays, sacred and secular poetry including epic, historiography, and Arthurian 
literature. Instructor: Woods. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 348S
390S. Special Topics in Latin Literature. FL Prerequisite: the completion of second-year or third-year 
Latin, depending on the topic. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and Director of Undergraduate Studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project containing significant analysis 
and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors; for seniors, the 
paper or project may partially fulfill the requirements for graduation with distinction. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
504S. Selections from Latin Texts/Authors in the Genres of History, Oratory, and/or Philosophy. 
ALP, CZ, EI, FL Detailed study of selections from one or more genres. Typical iterations might investigate 
Roman concept and practice of writing history from Cato to Ammianus Marcellinus; study of Roman oratory 
(readings might include Cicero, Quintilian, Tacitus); and/or philosophical texts (readings might include 
Lucretius, Seneca, Pliny the Elder, Vitruvius, Augustine, Boethius). Instructor: Atkins or staff. One course.
508S. Medieval and Renaissance Latin. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Detailed study of selections from one or 
more authors or genres. Selections either constitute a survey of Latin literature from late antiquity through the 
Renaissance, or focus on specific locations or periods (e.g. Insular Writers, or the Carolingian “Renaissance”, 
or the Long Twelfth Century). Authors and readings might include Augustine, Isidore of Seville, Bede, 
Einhard, Carolingian poetry, Hrotsvita, the Carmina Burana, Heloise and Abelard, Hildegard of Bingen, 
Petrarch, Lorenzo Valla, Leonardo Bruni. Topics may vary. Instructor: Woods. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 608S
524S. Latin Poetry: Epic, Lyric, and Elegy. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Detailed study of selections from one or 
more genre. Authors and readings might include Vergil, Ovid, Lucan, Statius’ Thebaid and Silvae, Valerius 
Flaccus, Silius Italicus, Catullus, Horace, Tibullus, Propertius, Martial, Juvencus, medieval Latin court poetry 
and love lyric. Instructor: Janan. One course.
528S. Selections from Latin Texts/Authors in the Genres of Drama, Satire, and/or the Novel. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Detailed study of selections from one or more of the genres Drama, Satire, Novel. Authors 
and readings might include Plautus, Terence, Seneca, Horace, Persius, Juvenal, Petronius, Apuleius. Instructor: 
Ginsberg or Janan. One course.
551. Elementary Latin for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. FL Study of the structure 
of the language (i.e., forms, vocabulary, syntax, and pronunciation); selected readings in prose and poetry. The 
course will feature additional work commensurate with the difference in expectations between undergraduate 
and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, additional or differently scoped exam/quiz 
opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as consistent with the goals of the 
class. Instructor: Staff. One course.
552. Elementary Latin for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. FL Second half of Latin 
551-552. The course will feature additional work commensurate with the difference in expectations between 
undergraduate and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, additional or differently scoped 
exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as consistent with the 
goals of the class. Prerequisite: Latin 551. Instructor: Staff. One course.
580. Survey of Latin Literature from its Beginnings to Late Antiquity. ALP, CCI, FL Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
581S. Latin Prose Syntax and Style. CCI, FL Latin prose composition combined with analysis of the style 
and syntax of select Latin prose authors. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Latin (LATIN)  251

584S. Latin Palaeography. ALP, CZ, FL Introduction to the field of Latin Palaeography, its history and 
methods; also the role of the book in the intellectual life of the medieval and Renaissance periods. Particular 
emphasis placed on learning to read Latin scripts from antiquity to the Renaissance. Instructor: Woods. One 
course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 647S
585S. Latin Epigraphy. CZ, FL Introduction to the field of Latin epigraphy, its history, methods, and 
place within the field of Classical Studies. Close attention to reading and translation of the variety of inscribed 
documentary and literary Latin texts, and to the original physical and social contexts of inscriptions. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
653. Intermediate Latin for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. CZ, FL Politics and 
thought in the late Republic: Caesar and Cicero. The course will feature additional work commensurate with the 
difference in expectations between undergraduate and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, 
additional or differently scoped exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or 
the like, as consistent with the goals of the class. Prerequisite: Latin 552 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
654. Advanced Intermediate Latin for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. CZ, FL The 
culture of Republican and Augustan Rome: selections from Cicero, Catullus, Vergil, Horace, Ovid or similar. The 
course will feature additional work commensurate with the difference in expectations between undergraduate 
and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, additional or differently scoped exam/quiz 
opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or the like, as consistent with the goals of the 
class. Prerequisite: Latin 653 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
655. Refresher Latin for Graduate Students outside Classical Studies. CZ, FL This course is for 
graduate students who have had high school Latin and want or need a single refresher or preparatory course 
to transition to advanced (500-level) Latin. It includes grammar review and readings of real (unsimplified) 
prose and poetry texts not read in high school. The course will feature additional work commensurate with the 
difference in expectations between undergraduate and graduate classes. This could involve additional reading, 
additional or differently scoped exam/quiz opportunities or assignments, additional out-of-class meetings, or 
the like, as consistent with the goals of the class. Recommended prerequisite: at least 3 years of high school 
Latin (or the equivalent). Instructor: Staff. One course.
691. Directed Reading and Research. Credit to be arranged. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

The Major

Classical Languages (Greek and Latin)
Major Requirements. Knowledge of both Greek and Latin through the second year (i.e., through Greek 

252 or the equivalent). Eight courses in Greek and/or Latin, at least six of which must be at the 250 level or above; 
one 200-level or above course in Classical Studies; Classical Studies 480S (Capstone Seminar). Latin 251 and 
252 will both count towards the classical studies major. Total: Ten courses and the Senior Dossier.

For double majors in classical languages and classical civilization, no more than two courses may be counted 
toward both majors.

Classical Civilization (Ancient History, Culture, Literature, Archaeology)
Major Requirements. Two required introductory courses: Option 1: Classical Studies 181S or 283 and 

182S or 284; Option 2: two courses in Greek or Latin below the 250 level. Note: The two options may not be 
combined (e.g., Classical Studies 181S and Latin 102 do not satisfy the requirement). Seven classical studies 
courses at or above the 200 level; literature in the original language, at or above the 250 level. Courses must be in 
at least three of the following areas: literature in translation at or above the 200-level, or in the original language 
at or above the 250 level; history; art and archaeology; philosophy. Classical Studies 480S (Capstone Seminar). 
Latin 251 and 252 will both count toward the classical studies major. Total: Ten courses and the Senior Dossier. 

For double majors in classical languages and classical civilization, no more than two courses may be counted 
toward both majors.



 Computational Media, Arts & Cultures (CMAC)252

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Graduation with Distinction is available to majors. Eligible students must have a 3.5 grade point average 

in the major (3.3 overall) at the beginning of their project and must maintain these through completion. In 
the context of a research independent study (Classical Studies/Greek/Latin 493) the candidate writes a major 
research paper. A committee of three faculty members votes whether to award Distinction, High Distinction, or 
Highest Distinction for the work. Majors interested in applying shall consult the director of undergraduate studies 
by the spring of their junior year.

The Minor
Four minors are offered by the department, as listed below. No courses used to fulfill the requirements of 

one minor may be used for another, or for the majors in classical languages or classical civilization. 

Classical Archaeology
Requirements. Five Classical Studies (CLST) courses in ancient art and archaeology. At least three of 

these must be at taught by a primary or secondary member of the Department of Classical Studies, and at least 
three courses must be at or above the 200-level. 

Classical Civilization
Requirements. Five Classical Studies (CLST) courses. At least three of these must be at taught by a primary 

or secondary member of the Department of Classical Studies, and at least three courses must be at or above the 
200 level in at least two levels: literature in translation (or in the original language at or above the 250 level); 
history; art and archaeology; philosophy. 

Greek
Requirements. Five courses in ancient Greek. At least three of these must be at taught by a primary or 

secondary member of the Department of Classical Studies, and at least three courses must be at or above the 250 
level. 

Latin
Requirements. Five courses in Latin. At least three of these must be at taught by a primary or secondary 

member of the Department of Classical Studies, and at least three courses must be at or above the 250 level.

Comparative Literature
For courses in comparative literature, see the Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program on page 526.

Computational Media, Arts & Cultures
Professor Seaman, Director; Professors Calderbank, DeFrantz, Dillon, Forte, Hansen, Hardt, Jaskot, Johnsen, 
Lamarre, Lindroth, Seaman, Van Miegroet, Vo-Dinh, and Wharton; Associate Professor Supko; Associate Pro-
fessors of the Practice Cetinkaya-Rundel and Klein; Associate Research Professors Lasch and Szabo; Assistant 
Professors of the Practice Olson Wendell, and Wilber; Assistant Research Professor Kenney

Courses in Computational Media, Arts & Cultures (CMAC)
564S. Physical Computing. QS, STS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 564S; also C-L: Information Science + 
Studies 555S
575S. Generative Media Authorship - Music, Text & Image. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 575S; 
also C-L: Information Science + Studies 575S, Music 575S
580S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 1. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Art History 
580S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 580S
581S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 2. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Art History 
581S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 581S
590S. Special Topics in Computational Media, Arts, and Cultures. Topics vary by semester and 



Computational Media, Arts & Cultures (CMAC) 253

include subjects, areas, or themes that embrace a range of disciplines in the arts and humanities areas. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
591. Individual Independent Study. This course is an independent study which encourages students to 
pursue original/individual research in their academic field within Computational Media, Arts and Cultures. 
Students will conduct directed research and writing in areas unrepresented by regular course offerings. Students 
will meet with instructor on a weekly basis to discuss project progress; other requirements are to be determined 
based on needs of project proposal. Only students with pre-approved project proposals should register for this 
course. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
592. Individual Independent Study. This course is an independent study that encourages students to 
pursue original/individual research in their academic field within Computational Media, Arts and Cultures. 
Students will conduct directed research and writing in areas unrepresented by regular course offerings. Students 
will meet with instructor on a weekly basis to discuss project progress; other requirements are to be determined 
based on needs of project proposal. Only students with pre-approved project proposals should register for this 
course. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
613S. Computational Media Studio in Advanced Digital Practice. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see 
Historical and Cultural Visualization 613S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 613S
650S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar. ALP, R, SS, STS This course is an 
introduction to scholarship at the nexus of theory and practice. It includes theoretical readings in computational 
media, design, and critique, and focuses on how these inform and provide critical context for practice-based 
modes of learning and production. Students will learn about various areas of computational media theory and 
culture, including media archaeology, data and visualization, computation and culture, database and narrative, 
and data-mining and big data. Students will explore how theoretical approaches can guide and challenge 
practical work in media design. Students will be oriented to Media Labs and other computationally-based 
projects around campus. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 650S, Literature 
621S, Art History 537S, Visual and Media Studies 561S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
690S. Special Topics in Computational Media, Arts, and Cultures. Subjects, areas, or themes that 
embrace a range of disciplines in the arts and humanities areas. Instructor: Staff. One course.
692. Individual Independent Study. This course is an independent study that encourages students to 
pursue original/individual research in their academic field within Computational Media, Arts and Cultures. 
Students will conduct directed research and writing in areas unrepresented by regular course offerings. Students 
will meet with instructor on a weekly basis to discuss project progress; other requirements are to be determined 
based on needs of project proposal. Only students with pre-approved project proposals should register for this 
course. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Computer Science
Professor Agarwal, Chair; Professor Jun Yang, Associate Chair; Professor of the Practice Rodger, Director of 
Undergraduate Studies; Professor of the Practice Astrachan, Associate Director of Undergraduate Studies; Pro-
fessors Agarwal, Calderbank, Carin, Chakrabarty, Chase, Chen, Conitzer, Cummings, Donald, Groh, Hartemink, 
Kim, Lebeck, Maggs, Mukherjee, Munagala, Parr, Reif, Rudin, Sapiro, Sorin, Sun, Tarokh, Tomasi, Trivedi, and 
J. Yang; Associate Professors Bartesaghi, Board, Farsiu, Gordân, Lee, Li, Machanavajjhala, Panigrahi,  Rossman, 
Schmidler, X. Yang, and Zavlanos; Assistant Professors Carlson, Ge, Gong,  Gorlatova, Heller, Nayak, Pajic,  Ran-
dles, Roy, Steorts, Wills, and Zhou; Professors Emeriti Biermann, Ellis,  Loveland, Lucic, Patrick, Ramm, and 
Starmer, ; Professors of the Practice Astrachan and Rodger; Associate Professors of the Practice Daily, and Forbes;  
Assistant Professor of the Practice Stephens-Martinez; Assistant Research Professor Fain; Adjunct Professors 
Baldin,  Kaltofen, Konidaris, LaBean, Pitsianis, and Quan; Senior Lecturer Duvall

A major and a minor are available in this department.
The Department of Computer Science provides courses on the concepts of computing and computers, their 

capabilities, and uses. In most courses students make extensive use of the available computing facilities. Students 
who wish to take a single introductory course, as part of their general education, usually elect Computer Science 
92, 94 or 101.



 Computer Science (COMPSCI)254

Courses in Computer Science (COMPSCI)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
92L. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet. EI, QS, STS Study of standards, 
software, policy, and the impact of computing and the Internet on science and society. Analysis and creation 
of software and other computational and digital artifacts to solve problems in many domains using different 
approaches, including data mining, web-based communication, algorithmic and data-driven approaches, crowd-
sourcing. Use of real-world problems in understanding evolving international standards. Analysis of tradeoffs in 
ethical, economic, and technical areas. Instructor: Astrachan or Lucic. One course. C-L: Information Science + 
Studies 101L, Policy Journalism and Media
94. Programming and Problem Solving. QS Programming and problem solving in a specific domain such 
as robotics, virtual worlds, web programming, biology, genomics, or computer science. Students learn the basics 
of programming by studying problems in one application area. Instructor: Astrachan, Duvall, Forbes, or Rodger. 
One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
101L. Introduction to Computer Science. QS Introduction practices and principles of computer science 
and programming and their impact on and potential to change the world. Algorithmic, problem-solving, and 
programming techniques in domains such as art, data visualization, mathematics, natural and social sciences. 
Programming using high-level languages and design techniques emphasizing abstraction, encapsulation, and 
problem decomposition. Design, implementation, testing, and analysis of algorithms and programs. No previous 
programming experience required. Not open to students who have taken Computer Science 201. Instructor: 
Astrachan, Duvall, Forbes, or Rodger. One course.
102L. Interdisciplinary Introduction to Computer Science. QS Introduction to the practices and 
principles of computer science and programming and their impact on and potential to change the world 
motivated by problems drawn from natural science, social science, engineering, and humanities. Programming 
using Python, appropriate libraries, and APIs to process, analyze, and visualize data. Design, implementation, 
and analysis emphasizing abstraction, encapsulation, and problem decomposition. No previous programming 
experience required. Instructor: Astrachan and staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 104L
103L. Computing and the Brain. NS, QS Introductory programming based on problems in neuroscience. 
Provides foundational skills for using computers to collect and analyze neuroscience data. Study of how 
computational processes are implemented by information-processing entities: both brains and computers. 
Python programming to generate sensory stimuli and collect/analyze behavioral and neural data. Scientific 
and Software Engineering best practices for conducting and verifying neuroscience experiments. Not open to 
students who have taken Computer Science 101. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 
102/Psychology 107. Instructor: Astrachan. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 103L, Psychology 113L
110. Information, Society & Culture: Bass Connections Gateway. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 110; also C-L: Philosophy 110, Public Policy 110
116. Foundations of Data Science. QS, STS Introduction to computer programming and statistical 
inference in the process of conducting analysis of real-world datasets, including economic data, document 
collections, geographical data, and social networks. Exploration of data via visualization and descriptive 
statistics. Creating predictions with techniques from machine learning and optimization.Testing hypotheses and 
making statistical inferences. Learn basic Python programming skills to organize and manipulate data in tables, 
and to visualize data effectively. Discussion of social issues surrounding data analysis such as privacy and bias. 
No prior programming experience or statistics coursework is required. Instructor: Forbes, staff. One course.
190. Topics in Computer Science. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Computer Science. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program: Topics in Computer Science. Topics vary by semester. Open only to students in 
the Focus program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Topics in Computer Science. Seminar version of Computer Science 190, topics from various areas of 
computer science, changing each year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201. Data Structures and Algorithms. QS Analysis, use, and design of data structures and algorithms 



Computer Science (COMPSCI) 255

using an object-oriented language like Java to solve computational problems. Emphasis on abstraction including 
interfaces and abstract data types for lists, trees, sets, tables/maps, and graphs. Implementation and evaluation 
of programming techniques including recursion. Intuitive and rigorous analysis of algorithms. Prerequisite: 
Computer Science 101 or Engineering 103L, or equivalent. Instructor: Astrachan, Forbes, or Rodger. One course. 
C-L: Information Science + Studies
216. Everything Data. QS Study of data and its acquisition, integration, querying, analysis, and visualization. 
Concepts and computational tools for working with unstructured, semi-structured, and structured data 
and databases. Interdisciplinary perspectives of data and its impact crossing science, humanities, policy, 
and social science. Culminating team project applied to real datasets. Prerequisite: 200-level computer 
science OR 100-level Statistics OR 200-level Math course, or permission of instructor. Instructor: Yang and 
Machanavajjhala. One course.
230. Discrete Math for Computer Science. QS Mathematical notations, logic, and proof; linear and 
matrix algebra; graphs, digraphs, trees, representations, and algorithms; counting, permutations, combinations, 
discrete probability, Markov models; advanced topics from algebraic structures, geometric structures, 
combinatorial optimization, number theory. Pre/corequisite: Computer Science 201. Instructor: Agarwal, 
Donald, Rodger, or Tomasi. One course.
249. Computer Science Education Research. A project-based course involving computer science 
education, issues on computer science curricula, and educational techniques in general. Students should have 
previous or current experience in teaching or tutoring Computer Science. May be repeated. Instructor consent is 
required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
250D. Computer Architecture. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 250D
260. Introduction to Computational Genomics. NS, QS A computational perspective on the analysis of 
genomic and genome-scale information. Focus on exploration and analysis of large genomic sequences, but also 
attention to issues in structural and functional genomics. Topics include genome sequence assembly, local and 
global alignment, gene and motif finding, protein threading and folding, and the clustering and classification 
of genes and tissues using gene expression data. Students to learn computational approaches to genomics as 
well as to develop practical experience with handling, analyzing, and visualizing information at a genome-scale. 
Instructor: Hartemink or Gordân. One course. C-L: Science & Society
288. Logic and Its Applications. One course. C-L: see Mathematics 388; also C-L: Philosophy 350
290. Topics in Computer Science. Topics from various areas of computer science, changing each year. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Computer Science. Topics 
differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Topics in Computer Science. Seminar version of Computer Science 290. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
307D. Software Design and Implementation. Techniques for design and construction of reliable, 
maintainable and useful software systems development in teams. Programming paradigms and tools for small to 
medium projects: revision control, GUI, software engineering, testing, documentation. Prerequisite: Computer 
Science 201. Not open to students who have taken Computer Science 308. Instructor: Duvall. One course.
308. Advanced Software Design and Implementation. QS Techniques for design and construction of 
reliable, maintainable and useful software systems. Programming paradigms and tools for medium to large 
projects: revision control, UNIX tools, performance analysis, GUI, software engineering, testing, documentation. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. Not open to students who have taken Computer Science 307. Instructor: 
Duvall. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
309S. Problem Solving Seminar. QS Techniques for attacking, solving, and writing computer programs for 
challenging computational problems. Algorithmic and programming language tool kits. Course may be repeated. 
Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Astrachan. Half course.
310. Introduction to Operating Systems. QS Basic concepts and principles of multiprogrammed operating 
systems. Processes, interprocess communication, CPU scheduling, mutual exclusion, deadlocks, memory 
management, I/O devices, file systems, protection mechanisms. Also taught as Electrical and Computer 



 Computer Science (COMPSCI)256

Engineering 353. Prerequisites: Computer Science 201 and either of Computer Science 250 or Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 250L. Instructor: Chase, Cox, or Maggs. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 353
316. Introduction to Database Systems. QS Databases and relational database management systems. 
Data modeling, database design theory, data definition and manipulation languages, storaging and indexing 
techniques, query processing and optimization, concurrency control and recovery, database programming 
interfaces. Current research issues including XML, web data management, data integration and dissemination, 
data mining. Hands-on programming projects and a term project. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. 
Instructor: Yang. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
323D. Computational Microeconomics. QS Use of computational techniques to operationalize 
basic concepts from economics. Expressive marketplaces: combinatorial auctions and exchanges, winner 
determination problem. Game theory: normal and extensive-form games, equilibrium notions, computing 
equilibria. Mechanism design: auction theory, automated mechanism design. Prerequisite: at least one of 
the following: Computer Science 230, 200-level Mathematics course, or 200-level Statistical Science course. 
Instructor: Conitzer. One course. C-L: Economics 336D
330. Introduction to the Design and Analysis of Algorithms. QS Design and analysis of efficient 
algorithms including sorting, searching, dynamic programming, graph algorithms, fast multiplication, and 
others; nondeterministic algorithms and computationally hard problems. Prerequisites: Computer Science 201 
and 230. Instructors: Agarwal, Munagala, Panigrahi, or Reif. One course.
334. Mathematical Foundations of Computer Science. QS An introduction to theoretical computer 
science including studies of abstract machines, the language hierarchy from regular sets to recursively 
enumerable sets, noncomputability, and complexity theory. Prerequisites: Computer Science 201, recommended 
Computer Science 230. Instructor: Reif or Rodger. One course.
342. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet. EI, R, SS, W The development 
of technical and social standards governing the Internet and information technology in general. The role 
of software as it relates to law, patents, intellectual property, and IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) 
standards. Written analysis of issues from a technical perspective with an emphasis on the role of software and 
on how standards relate to social and ethical issues. Current events as a driver for writing in traditional and 
online formats related to technology and policy. Open only to students with declared Computer Science major. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. Instructor: Astrachan and Forbes. One course.
342S. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet. EI, R, SS, W The development 
of technical and social standards governing the Internet and information technology in general. The role 
of software as it relates to law, patents, intellectual property, and IETF (Internet Engineering Task Force) 
standards. Written analysis of issues from a technical perspective with an emphasis on the role of software and 
on how standards relate to social and ethical issues. Current events as a driver for writing in traditional and 
online formats related to technology and policy. Open only to students with declared Computer Science major. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Astrachan and Forbes. One course. 
C-L: Information Science + Studies
344. Computer Graphics. QS Overview, motivation, and history; Graphic software and APIs; coordinate 
systems and geometric transforms; drawing routines, antialiasing, supersampling; 3d object representation, 
spatial data structures, constructive solid geometry; hidden-surface-removal algorithms, z-buffer, A-buffer; 
illumination and shading models, surface details, radiosity; achromatic light, color specification, colorimetry, 
different color models; graphics pipeline; animation, levels of detail. Prerequisites: Computer Science 201. 
Instructor: Duvall. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 241
350L. Digital Systems. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 350L
351. Computer Security. SS Cryptographic primitives including private key cryptography, and public key 
cryptography. Software security including buffer overflows, SQL injection, Web-based attacks, and viruses. 
Network security including TCP and DNS. Topics in applied cryptography including digital currency, searchable 
encryption, secure multiparty computation, secret sharing, homomorphic encryption, Zero knowledge proofs. 
Anonymity. Prerequisite: Computer Science 250D. Instructor: Maggs or Nayak. One course.
356. Computer Network Architecture. Introduces students to the fundamentals of computer networks. 



Computer Science (COMPSCI) 257

Focus on layered architecture of the network protocol stack. Case studies will be drawn from the Internet, 
combined with practical programming exercises. Concepts include the Internet architecture, HTTP, DNS, P2P, 
Sockets, TCP/IP, BGP, routing protocols, and wireless/mobile networking and their applications such as how to 
achieve reliable/secure communications over unreliable/insecure channels, how to find a good path through a 
network, how to share network resources among competing entities, how to find an object in the network, and 
how to build network applications. Prerequisite: ECE 250D or Computer Science 250D. Instructor: Gorlatova or 
X. Yang. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 356, Information Science + Studies
370D. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence. QS Algorithms and representations used in artificial 
intelligence. Introduction and implementation of algorithms for search, planning, decision, theory, logic, 
Bayesian networks, robotics and machine learning. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and one of the 
following: Computer Science 230, 200-level Mathematics course, or 200-level Statistical Science course. 
Instructor: Conitzer, Parr, or Tomasi. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
371D. Elements of Machine Learning. QS Fundamental concepts of supervised machine learning, with 
sample algorithms and applications. Focuses on how to think about machine learning problems and solutions, 
rather than on a systematic coverage of techniques. Serves as an introduction to the methods of machine 
learning. Prerequisite: Mathematics 221, 218, or 216; Mathematics 212; Mathematics 230 or Statistical Science 
230; and Computer Science 201. Instructor: Tomasi. One course.
390. Topics in Computer Science. Topics from various areas of computer science, changing each year. 
Includes research intensive work exposing the student to computer science research methodology and resulting 
in a major document or project. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual work in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper, project, or written report covering a previously 
approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper, project, or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Computer Science 393. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
408. Delivering Software: From Concept to Client. EI, R, STS Development of software in teams that 
benefits a real-world client in the client’s area of expertise. Meet client demands and needs including technology 
management skills such as feasibility assessment, project planning, project implementation, usability testing, 
documentation, marketing, and roll-out. Create significant software product, understand software development 
cycle at scale, create written work to accompany software. Recommended prerequisite: Computer Science 308 
or similar team programming experience. Instructor: Duvall and Lucic. One course.
434. Topological Data Analysis. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 412
445. Introduction to High Dimensional Data Analysis. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 465; also 
C-L: Statistical Science 465
510. Operating Systems. QS Fundamental principles of operating system design applied to state-of-
the-art computing environments (multiprocessors and distributed systems) including process management 
(coscheduling and load balancing), shared memory management (data migration and consistency), and 
distributed file systems. Instructor: Chase, Cox, or Maggs. One course.
512. Distributed Systems. Principles and techniques for sharing information and resources in computer 
networks, ranging from high-speed clusters and data centers to the global Internet. Topics include advanced 
distributed storage, distributed programming environments, replication, caching and consistency, transactional 
concurrency control, reliable update and recovery, and issues of scale and security for Internet services. 
Recommended prerequisite: Computer Science 310 or 510. Instructor: Chase or Maggs. One course.
514. Advanced Computer Networks. QS, R Entry-level graduate course. Basic systems support for 
process-to-process communications across a computer network. The TCP/IP protocol suite and the Berkeley 



 Computer Science (COMPSCI)258

sockets application programs interface. The topics include congestion control, packet scheduling, routing, 
software defined networking, datacenter networks, network function virtualization, programmable switches, 
network measurement, remote direct memory access, residential networks, peer-to-peer networks, and content 
distribution networks. Recommended prerequisite: entry-level computer systems course (Computer Science 
310, 356, 510); knowledge of the C or Python. Instructor: Maggs or X. Yang. One course. C-L: Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 558
515. Wireless Networking and Mobile Computing. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 556
516. Database Systems. QS, R Principles and techniques for making intelligent use of the massive amounts 
of data generated in commerce, industry, science, and society. Topics include basic concepts in databases 
(SQL, relational algebra, relational calculus, normal forms), indexing and hashing, query processing and query 
optimizations, transactions (concurrency control and recovery), parallel and distributed data processing, 
NOSQL and column store, and selected advanced topics (e.g. Datalog, cloud computing fault-tolerant / 
self-tuning data management, Web information retrieval/extraction, data warehouse, OLAP, data mining). 
Prerequisites: Computer Science 316 or an introductory database course or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Machanavajjhala, Roy, or J. Yang. One course.
520. Numerical Analysis. QS, R Error analysis, interpolation and spline approximation, numerical 
differentiation and integration, solutions of linear systems, nonlinear equations, and ordinary differential 
equations. Prerequisites: knowledge of an algorithmic programming language, intermediate calculus including 
some differential equations, and Mathematics 221. Instructor: Sun. One course. C-L: Mathematics 565, 
Statistical Science 612
524. Nonlinear Dynamics. NS, QS, R One course. C-L: see Nonlinear and Complex Systems 513
527. Introduction to Computer Vision. Image formation and analysis; feature computation and tracking; 
image, object, and activity recognition and retrieval; 3D reconstruction from images. Prerequisites: Mathematics 
221, 218 or 216; Mathematics 212; Mathematics 230 or Statistical Science 230; Computer Science 101; Computer 
Science 230. Instructor: Tomasi. One course.
528. Introduction to Computational Science. QS Introduction to scientific computing and its applications 
to facilitate interdisciplinary collaborative research. Brief intro to contemporary high performance computer 
architectures, basic linear algebra, numerical analysis, programming languages and widely available software 
packages. Study high performance algorithms in finite elements, fast transforms, molecular dynamics, high 
dimensional optimization, computational quantum mechanics and visualization. Parallel lab sessions by experts 
offer further specialization. Prerequisite: programming experience in Fortran or C, calculus, numerical linear 
algebra or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
531D. Introduction to Algorithms. QS Applications include dynamic data structures,graph algorithms, 
randomized algorithms. Intractability and NP completeness. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and 230, or 
equivalent. Instructor: Agarwal, Ge, Munagala, Panigrahi or Reif. One course.
532. Design and Analysis of Algorithms. QS Design and analysis of efficient algorithms. Algorithmic 
paradigms. Applications include sorting, searching, dynamic structures, graph algorithms, randomized 
algorithms. Computationally hard problems. NP completeness. Prerequisites: Computer Science 201 and 330 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Agarwal, Ge, Munagala, Panigrahi, or Reif. One course.
534. Computational Complexity. QS Turing machines, undecidability, recursive function theory, 
complexity measures, reduction and completeness, NP, NP-Completeness, co-NP, beyond NP, relativized 
complexity, circuit complexity, alternation, polynomial time hierarchy, parallel and randomized computation, 
algebraic methods in complexity theory, communication complexity. Prerequisite: Computer Science 334 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Agarwal or Reif. One course.
550. Advanced Computer Architecture I. QS, R Fundamental aspects of advanced computer architecture 
design and analysis. Topics include processor design, pipelining, superscalar, out-of-order execution, caches 
(memory hierarchies), virtual memory, storage systems, simulation techniques, technology trends and future 
challenges. Prerequisite: Computer Science 250 or Electrical and Computer Engineering 350 or equivalent. 
Instructors: Lebeck, Lee, or Sorin. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 552
553. Compiler Construction. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 553



Computer Science (COMPSCI) 259

554. Fault-Tolerant and Testable Computer Systems. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 554
555. Probability for Electrical and Computer Engineers. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 555; also C-L: Information Science + Studies
561. Computational Sequence Biology. Introduction to algorithmic and computational issues in analysis 
of biological sequences: DNA, RNA, and protein. Emphasizes probabilistic approaches and machine learning 
methods, e.g. Hidden Markov models. Explores applications in genome sequence assembly, protein and DNA 
homology detection, gene and promoter finding, motif identification, models of regulatory regions, comparative 
genomics and phylogenetics, RNA structure prediction, post-transcriptional regulation. Prerequisites: basic 
knowledge algorithmic design (Computer Science 532 or equivalent), probability and statistics (Statistical 
Science 611 or equivalent), molecular biology (Biology 118 or equivalent). Alternatively, consent instructor. 
Instructor: Gordan or Hartemink. One course. C-L: Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 561
570. Artificial Intelligence. QS Design and analysis of algorithms and representations for artificial 
intelligence problems. Formal analysis of techniques used for search, planning, decision theory, logic, Bayesian 
networks, robotics, and machine learning. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 and Computer Science 330. 
Instructor: Conitzer or Parr. One course.
571D. Probabilistic Machine Learning. QS One course. C-L: see Statistical Science 561D; also C-L: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 682D
579. Statistical Data Mining. QS One course. C-L: see Statistical Science 622
590. Advanced Topics in Computer Science. Instructor: Staff. One course.
624. Nanoscale and Molecular Scale Computing. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 611
630. Randomized Algorithms. QS Models of computation, Las Vegas and Monte Carlo algorithms, 
linearity of expectation, Markov and Chebyshev inequalities and their applications, Chernoff bound and its 
applications, probabilistic methods, expanders, Markov chains and random walk, electric networks and random 
walks, rapidly mixing Markov chains, randomized data structures, randomized algorithms for graph problems, 
randomized geometric algorithms, number theoretic algorithms, RSA cryptosystem, derandomization. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 532. Instructor: Agarwal, Ge, Munagala, Panigrahi, or Reif. One course.
632. Approximation Algorithms. QS Cover traditional approximation algorithms with combinatorial 
and linear programming techniques; extended survey of cut problems and metric embeddings; embeddings, 
dimensionality reduction, locality sensitive hashing, and game theory. Instructor: Agarwal, Munagala, or 
Panigrahi. One course.
634. Geometric Algorithms. QS Models of computation and lower-bound techniques; storing and 
manipulating orthogonal objects; orthogonal and simplex range searching, convex hulls, planar point location, 
proximity problems, arrangements, linear programming and parametric search technique, probabilistic and 
incremental algorithms. Prerequisite: Computer Science 532 or equivalent. Instructor: Agarwal. One course. 
C-L: Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 634
636. Computational Topology. QS Introduction to topology via graphs; facts about curves and surfaces; 
representing triangulations; discussion of simplicial complexes; emphasis on Delaunay and alpha complexes 
and on homology groups; computational via matrix reduction; Morse functions; PL functions; Reeb graphs; 
development of persistent homology; proof of stability; applications and extensions. Prerequisite: Computer 
Science 532. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Mathematics 619
638. Graph Algorithms. QS This is an advanced course in theoretical computer science covering some of 
the most influential work in graph algorithms. Given the broad impact that graph algorithms have had on the 
general algorithmic toolkit, this course also provides exposure to many key techniques that have been developed 
in algorithmic theory. Specific topics covered include network flows, graph connectivity, spectral graph theory, 
and network design algorithms. Recommended prerequisite: Computer Science 532 or an equivalent course in 
algorithms at a graduate level. Instructor: Panigrahi. One course.
650. Advanced Computer Architecture II. QS Parallel computer architecture design and evaluation. 
Design topics include parallel programming, message passing, shared memory, cache coherence, cache 



 Computer Science (COMPSCI)260

coherence, memory consistency models, symmetric multiprocessors, distributed shared memory, 
interconnection networks, and synchronization. Evaluation topics include modeling, simulation, and 
benchmarking. Prerequisite: Computer Science 550 or Electrical and Computer Engineering 552 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Lebeck, Lee, or Sorin. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 652
662. Computational Systems Biology. NS, QS, R Provides a systematic introduction to algorithmic 
and computational issues present in the analysis of biological systems. Emphasizes probabilistic approaches 
and machine learning methods. Explores modeling basic biological processes (e.g., transcription, splicing, 
localization and transport, translation, replication, cell cycle, protein complexes, evolution) from a systems 
biology perspective. Lectures and discussions of primary literature. Prerequisites: basic knowledge of algorithm 
design (Computer Science 532 or equivalent), probability and statistics (Statistical Science 611 or equivalent), 
molecular biology (Biology 201L or equivalent), and computer programming. Alternatively, consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Hartemink. One course. C-L: Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 662, Science & 
Society
663. Algorithms in Structural Biology and Biophysics. NS, QS, R Introduction to algorithmic 
and computational issues in structural molecular biology and molecular biophysics. Emphasizes geometric 
algorithms, provable approximation algorithms, computational biophysics, molecular interactions, 
computational structural biology, proteomics, rational drug design, and protein design. Explores computational 
methods for discovering new pharmaceuticals, NMR and X-ray data, and protein-ligand docking. 
Prerequisites: students should have some familiarity with algorithms, and a basic knowledge of molecular 
biology. Alternatively, consent of instructor. Instructor: Donald. One course. C-L: Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics 663
664. Computational Structural Biology. QS, R Introduction to theory and computation of 
macromolecular structure. Principles of biopolymer structure: computer representations and database search; 
molecular dynamics and Monte Carlo simulation; statistical mechanics of protein folding; RNA and protein 
structure prediction (secondary structure, threading, homology modeling); computer-aided drug design; 
proteomics; statistical tools (neural networks, HMMs, SVMs). Prerequisites: basic knowledge algorithmic design 
(Computational Biology and Bioinfomatics 230 or equivalent), probability and statistics (Statistics 611 and 
721 or equivalent), molecular biology (Biology 118 or equivalent), and computer programming. Alternatively, 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Schmidler. One course. C-L: Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 550, 
Statistical Science 614
671D. Machine Learning - Introductory PhD Level. QS This is an introductory overview course at an 
advanced level. Covers standard techniques, such as the perceptron algorithm, decision trees, random forests, 
boosting, support vector machines and reproducing kernel Hilbert spaces, regression, K-means, Gaussian 
mixture models and EM, neural networks, and multi-armed bandits. Covers introductory statistical learning 
theory. Recommended prerequisite: linear algebra, probability, analysis or equivalent. Instructor: Rudin. One 
course. C-L: Statistical Science 671D, Electrical and Computer Engineering 687D

The Major

For the AB Degree
Prerequisites. Computer Science 101L, 102, or 116 or equivalent; Mathematics 111L or equivalent; 

Mathematics 112L or equivalent
Major Requirements. Computer Science 201, 230, 250, 330, and one systems course from 310, 316, 

350, 351, 356, or their 500-level versions (510, 516, 550, 551, 514). Three electives at 200-level or higher: one 
in Computer Science (and not an independent study course); and two in either Computer Science (independent 
study possible), Electrical and Computer Engineering, Mathematics, Statistical Science, or a related area approved 
by the director of undergraduate studies.

For the previous curriculums, see https://www.cs.duke.edu/undergrad/ba/previous.

For the BS Degree
Prerequisites. Computer Science 101L, 102, or 116 or equivalent; Mathematics 111L or equivalent; 

Mathematics 112L or equivalent
Major Requirements. Computer Science 201, 230, 250, 330, and one systems course from 310, 316, 350, 

https://www.cs.duke.edu/undergrad/ba/previous


Computer Science (COMPSCI) 261

351, 356, or their 500-level versions (510, 516, 550, 551, 514). Two courses in Mathematics/Statistical Science: 
one of Mathematics 202, 216, 218, or 221; and one Statistical Science course at or above Statistical Science 111, 
including the cross-listed Mathematics 230. Five electives at 200-level or higher: three in Computer Science (and 
not independent study courses); and two in either Computer Science (independent study possible), Electrical 
and Computer Engineering, Mathematics, Statistical Science, or a related area approved by the director of 
undergraduate studies. 

For the previous curriculums, see https://www.cs.duke.edu/undergrad/ba/previous.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
A program for Graduation with Distinction in computer science is available. Candidates for a degree with 

Distinction, High Distinction, or Highest Distinction must apply to the director of undergraduate studies and 
meet the following criteria. Candidates for Graduation with Distinction must have a grade point average of 3.0 
or higher in computer science courses numbered above 200. Candidates must complete a substantial project, 
representing at least one year’s work and including at least one independent study, under the guidance of a faculty 
member in computer science who oversees and endorses the project. The project should represent a significant 
intellectual endeavor including the writing of a report. A presentation of the project must be made to a committee 
of three faculty members, two of whom will normally be from computer science although for interdisciplinary 
projects this restriction can be relaxed. Graduation with High or Highest Distinction is awarded at the discretion 
of the faculty committee in consultation with the director of undergraduate studies. Graduation with High or 
Highest Distinction is typically awarded for projects that are of publishable quality. In addition, candidates for 
a degree with high or highest distinction should have a grade point average of 3.5 or higher in those computer 
science courses related to the area of research; these courses must include at least one course at the 500 level. 

The Minor

Computer Science
Five courses in computer science (including the prerequisite), at least four of which must be at the 200 level 

or above.
Prerequisites. Computer Science 101L, 102, or 116 or equivalent
Requirements. Computer Science 201 and 250. All 200-level and above courses count in meeting the 

minor requirements 

Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 
Prerequisites. Mathematics 111L, and one of these: Mathematics 112, Mathematics 122, Statistical Science 

101 or above, or Biology 204
Requirements. Five courses at the 200 level or above (not including the prerequisites); three from computer 

science and two from biology, as follows: Computer Science 201, Computer Science 260. One of Computer Science 
216, 220, 224, 316, 370, or any 500-level course, or as approved by the director of undergraduate studies in 
computer science, e.g., an independent study in an area related to bioinformatics or computational biology. 
Biology 201L. One of Biology 215, 218, 220, 251L, 311, 325, 414LS, 416L, 418, 425, 450S, 556L, 557L, any 500 level 
or above non-independent study CBB course, or as approved by the director of undergraduate studies in computer 
science in consultation with the director of undergraduate studies in biology.

Cultural Anthropology
Professor Baker, Chair; Associate Professor Stein, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Allison, Baker, 
Ho, Matory, Nelson, Piot, and Starn; Associate Professors Litzinger, Makhulu, Meintjes, Solomon, and Stein; 
Assistant Professors Folch and McIntosh; Professor of the Practice Thompson; Professors Emeriti Ewing, O’Barr, 
and Silverblatt; Secondary Appointments: Professors Andrews (Slavic and Eurasian Studies), Mignolo (Romance 
Studies), and Reddy (History); Associate Professors of the Practice Mathers (International Comparative Studies) 
and Stewart (Global Health)

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Cultural anthropology is a comparative discipline that studies the world’s peoples and cultures. It extends 

perspectives developed from anthropology’s initial encounter with the “primitive” world to studies of complex 

https://www.cs.duke.edu/undergrad/ba/previous


 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)262

societies including rural and urban segments of the global South and contemporary industrial countries, with an 
emphasis on power, identity, and social justice.

Cultural anthropologists at Duke concentrate on political economy, culture, ideology, history, mass media, 
and discourse, and the relations among them. These concerns lead them to such specific research and teaching 
interests as: colonialism and state formation; the politics of representation and interpretation; histories of race 
and racism; popular culture, music, film, and advertising; the bases of ideological persuasion and resistance; 
gender ideology; language use in institutional contexts; class formation and political consciousness; war, peace-
making, and human rights, and the creation and use of ethnic and national identities. The department also 
offers courses that introduce the various traditional subfields and methods of cultural anthropology, and other, 
integrative courses on world areas. Faculty draw on their fieldwork in various geographic areas, with special 
strengths in Africa and the African diaspora, Latin America, Middle East, Japan, China, and the United States. 
Students without prerequisites for a course may ask the instructor for admission. 

Courses in Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)
80S. Studies in Special Topics. Opportunities for first-year students to engage with a specific issue in 
cultural anthropology, with emphasis on student writing. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Cultural Anthropology. CCI, CZ, SS Theoretical approaches to analyzing cultural 
beliefs and practices cross-culturally; application of specific approaches to case material from present and/or 
past cultures. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 101
101D. Introduction to Cultural Anthropology. CCI, CZ, SS Same as Cultural Anthropology 101 
except instruction is provided in lecture and discussion group each week. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 101D, International Comparative Studies
104. Introduction to Human Rights: Gateway for the Human Rights Certificate. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI This course introduces students to the field of human rights. The course has two primary purposes: to define 
and explore the key terms, concepts, foundations and theories of human rights; and examine alternative or 
competing definitions of rights using a case-based approach. This approach will include critiques of human 
rights, including from conservatives, nationalist and non-western thinkers. This design insures that students 
will see the connections between key rights ideas, like individual vs. collective rights, Western origins of rights 
concepts, humanitarian challenges, rights in the arts and visual culture and rights practice. Instructor: Kirk. 
One course. C-L: Public Policy 162, International Comparative Studies 113, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 104, Human Rights
105. Introduction to African Studies (DS3 or DS4). ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 103; also C-L: History 129, Political Science 108, International Comparative Studies 
110
106S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach. ALP, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 105S; also C-L: History 125S, Political Science 105S, Public Policy 170S, Visual and Media 
Studies 106S, Policy Journalism and Media
107. Introduction to Sustainable Development. CCI, EI, SS Readings and case studies in sustainable 
development, social entrepreneurship, and other attempts to address natural resource limitations, economic 
inequality, and social justice. Focuses on the problems that sustainability is intended to solve, competing 
definitions and values. Includes perspectives from development experts, for- and non-profit sector innovators, 
anthropologists and other social scientists. Instructor: Folch. One course.
113FS. Enterprising Leadership and Civic Engagement. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Education 113FS; 
also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 113FS, Human Rights
130. Anthropology and Film. SS The study of feature films and documentaries on issues of colonialism, 
imperialism, war and peace, and cultural interaction. An introduction to critical film theory and film production 
in non-Western countries. Instructor: Litzinger or O’Barr. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 
104, Visual and Media Studies 130, Documentary Studies 
131. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 263

Music 130; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 130, Human Rights, International 
Comparative Studies, Documentary Studies
133S. African Mbira Music: An Experiential Learning Class. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Music 
133S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 109S
137. Music, Social Life, and Scenes. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see Music 137; also C-L: 
Documentary Studies
140S. Empires in Modern European History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 140S; also C-L: 
Political Science 140S, Sociology 148S
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS Introduction to the Israel/Palestine 
conflict, studied through an interdisciplinary lens, including scholarship from the fields of anthropology, 
environmental studies, history, geography and cultural studies. Themes include: competing nationalisms, 
environmental politics and resource management, peace building, refugees and displacement, humanitarian 
crises and challenges, representational politics. Range of primary sources will be used including human rights 
reports and testimonials, natural resource policies, feature and documentary film, memoirs, political treatises, 
and maps. Instructor: Stein and Weinthal. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 244, Environment 
147, Jewish Studies 148, Public Policy 178, Political Science 159, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 148, Islamic Studies, Human Rights, Ethics Elective
150. Anthropology of Food. CCI, SS, STS Food systems, globalization and sustainability, cultural and 
symbolic uses of cuisine, politics and economics of consumption—production. Readings in anthropology of 
food, food economics, history of cuisine, and allied social science disciplines. Appropriate for students in social 
sciences, global/public health, etc. Instructor: Folch. One course.
153FS. Borderline Humans: How Walls (and Bridges) Define Us. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 153FS; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 153FS
167S. Gateway Seminar: Nationalism: Ideology, Technology, Globalization. CCI, CZ, SS One 
course. C-L: see History 167S; also C-L: Sociology 167S
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS History and development of 
commercial advertising; advertising as a reflector and/or creator of social and cultural values; advertisements as 
cultural myths; effects on children, women, and ethnic minorities; advertising and language; relation to political 
and economic structure; and advertising and world culture. Emphasis on American society complemented by 
case studies of advertising in Canada, Japan, Mexico, Russia, Western Europe, and selected other countries. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Sociology 160, Linguistics 170, Visual and Media Studies 170, International 
Comparative Studies 169, Markets and Management Studies, Policy Journalism and Media, Gender, Sexuality, & 
Feminist Studies
170D. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS Same as Cultural Anthropology 170 
except instruction is provided in lecture and discussion group each week. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Sociology 160D, Linguistics 170D, Visual and Media Studies 170D, Markets and Management Studies
171. Business Anthropology: Anthropologists in the Workplace. CCI, SS Introduces students to the 
various applications of anthropological theory and ethnographic method in contemporary institutional settings 
with the aim of familiarizing students with alternative career opportunities. The course looks at corporate 
and other private and public-sector use cases as well as the extensive literatures in the fields of organizational 
management, user, and consumer experience. Students also engage professionals in order to better understand 
processes of research, hypothesis testing, analysis, and the formulation of organizational management, design, 
and other strategic solutions for clients. Instructor: Makhulu. One course. C-L: African & African American 
Studies 171, International Comparative Studies 171, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 171, Sociology 171
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Introductory Special Topics in Cultural 
Anthropology. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics in Focus. Selected topics vary each semester. Open only to students in the Focus 
Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Topics in Cultural Anthropology. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)264

190SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Cultural Anthropology. Topics differ 
by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
195. Comparative Approaches to Global Issues. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 195; also C-L: History 103, Political Science 110, Sociology 195, Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 195, Marxism and Society
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 196FS; also C-L: African & African American Studies 196FS, Global Health 196FS, Psychology 
196FS, Public Policy 196FS, Sociology 196FS, Science & Society
201. Introduction to Linguistics. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 201; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies
202. Languages of the World. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 202; also C-L: Russian 362, 
International Comparative Studies 210
203. Marxism and Society. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 380; also C-L: Education 239, 
Sociology 339, Political Science 371, Marxism and Society, International Comparative Studies
205. The Law and Language. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 205
207. Anthropology of Sports. CCI, CZ, SS The role of sports in different cultures in the contemporary 
world. Dynamics of race, gender, sexuality, fantasy and desire, mythmaking and the culture of celebrity, 
commercial and mass media. Instructor: Starn. One course.
208. The Anthropology of Race. CCI, EI, SS Human variation and the historical development of concepts 
of race; science and scientific racism; folk-concepts of race; and the political and economic causes of racism; 
ethics of racism. Instructor: Baker. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 251, International 
Comparative Studies 239, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 208, Human Rights
208FS. The Anthropology of Race. CCI, EI, SS Same as Cultural Anthropology 208 but taught as part of 
the FOCUS program. Instructor: Baker. One course.
209. Arab Cultures: Literature, Politics, History. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 210; also C-L: Literature 251
210. Global Culture. CCI, SS Globalization examined through some of its dominant cultural forms—the 
marketing of pop music, the globalization of TV culture, the spread of markets and commodities, the export of 
political ideologies. Special focus given to the way in which these forms both affect and are transformed by local 
cultures in Africa, South Asia, East Asia, and Latin America. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 247, Markets and Management Studies
211FS. Geopolitics and Culture from ISIS to Afghanistan. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 208FS; also C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 209FS
212. Language and Society. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see English 395; also C-L: Linguistics 451, Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 385, International Comparative Studies 395, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 395, Human Rights
213. Cyborgs. CCI, SS, STS, W Philosophical, cross-cultural, historical, mass media, and political 
assumptions about what it means to be human that serve as the foundation for technological development. 
Instructor: Nelson. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 215, International Comparative 
Studies 241, Policy Journalism and Media
214S. Shamanism and Spirit Possession. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Religion 213S; also 
C-L: History 215S, International Comparative Studies 256S
215S. Indian Civilization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 219S; also C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 157S
216S. Global Migration and Ethics. EI, SS Same as Cultural Anthropology 216 except in seminar format. 
Instructor: McIntosh. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 262S, International Comparative Studies 244S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 216S, Human Rights
218S. Anthropology and Global Health. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Global Health 220S; also C-L: 



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 265

Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 220S, Human Rights
219S. Introduction to Performance Studies. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 202S; 
also C-L: Literature 202S, Visual and Media Studies 205S, English 202S
220FS. Global ‘Mixed Race’ Studies. CCI, EI, SS, STS By exploring pioneering and controversial writings 
from both the social and the biological sciences as well as the humanities, this course will situate debates on 
‘race’, ‘mixed race’ and social hierarchies within broader global, comparative, and historical contexts. These 
comparative examples shed light on the the different social, social, and historical meanings attached to ‘race’ 
and ‘mixed race’ and address social and cultural variations in the symbolic rules which determine the social 
status of ‘mixed race’ communities. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Ifekwunigwe. One 
course. C-L: Documentary Studies, Science & Society
220S. Global ‘Mixed Race’ Studies. CCI, SS, STS By exploring pioneering and controversial writings 
from both the social and the biological sciences as well as the humanities, this course will situate debates on 
‘ race’, ‘mixed race’ and social hierarchies within broader global, comparative, and historical contexts. These 
comparative examples shed light on the different social, cultural, and historical meanings attached to ‘race’ and 
‘mixed race’ and address social and cultural variations in the symbolic rules which determine the social status 
of ‘mixed race’ communities. Open only to DukeImmerse students. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Ifekwunigwe. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies, Science & Society
221SL. Capoeira: Practice and Culture. ALP, CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Dance 235SL; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 221SL, Romance Studies 235SL
222S. Sound in Social Life. ALP, CCI, STS Considers sonic environments as socially cultivated and 
sound production (recording, processing, mixing) and listening as cultural practices, shaped by acoustic space. 
Includes study of music, recorded soundscapes (films, games, installations, field recordings), built and ecological 
environments (rainforests, cities, institutions), and the history and use of sound technology (sound production, 
reproduction, reception, acoustic materials). Instructor: Meinjtes. One course. C-L: Music 239S, International 
Comparative Studies 246S
222SA. Sound in Social Life. ALP, CCI, SS, STS Focus on sound in NYC, to consider sonic environments 
as socially cultivated and listening as a cultural practice, shaped by acoustic space. Includes study of music, 
recorded soundscapes (films, games, installations), built and ecological environments (parks, subways, streets, 
institutions, clubs, neighborhoods), the politics of soundmaking, and the history and use of sound technology 
(sound production, reproduction, reception, acoustic materials). Considers noise ordinances in relation to public 
life, the representation of public life in sound, the shaping of city living practices by its acoustic architecture, 
and creative responses in sound as urban activist projects. Offered through the Duke in New York program. 
Instructor: Meintjes. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 246SA, Music 239SA
223S. Global Stories, Local Issues. CCI, EI, R, SS What stories are there to tell about often overlooked 
objects and people and places? How can we research and share those stories with generosity and integrity? 
In every corner of our lives—the stickers on our computers, the plates at a local restaurant, the wood in our 
guitars—there is a story to be told that connects our individual experiences to broader, often global, phenomena. 
Participants will learn and use methods of ethnography and archival research to connect their experiences and 
their observations about a place, community, or thing to larger stories about culture and society, and they will 
practice writing about their research in engaging and broadly accessible ways. Instructor: Brown. One course. 
C-L: Documentary Studies 223S, International Comparative Studies 260S
224S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 219S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 209S, International Comparative Studies 365S, History 225S, Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 224S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219S
225. Stimulants and Society. CCI, SS, STS Undergraduate course on stimulants and legal “drug foods” 
(e.g. sugar, coffee, tea, tobacco) their use and development historically in context of European colonialism 
and their transformation in major global commodities in modern capitalism. Studies the connection between 
pharmacology, cultural reception, markets, supply chains, and political economy. Students prepare for 
independent final research project via interdisciplinary readings from history, anthropology, environmental 
studies as well as in-class demonstrations and field visits. Suitable for students interested in food studies, STS, 
pharmacology as well as anthropology, history, environmental studies. Instructor: Folch. One course. C-L: 



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)266

International Comparative Studies 230
232. Gender and Language. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 364; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 207, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 232, Linguistics 364
234S. Anthropology and Education. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Education 234S
235. African Music: Sound, History, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Music 236; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 259
236S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 332S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 341S, Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 332S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 332S, Latino/a Studies in the Global 
South, Human Rights
238S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics. ALP, CCI, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 341S; also C-L: Public Policy 380S, International Comparative Studies 342S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 342S, Human Rights
240. Love and Loneliness: What’s Happening to Relationships in the Twenty-First Century?. 
CCI, CZ, EI, SS Long-standing ties to other—whether of kinship, marriage, or community—have long been 
considered to be fundamental to the human condition. But in an age of dissipated and shifting social worlds, 
the relationships we form with others are radically changing in the twenty-first century. The class will critically 
examine the ideals, premises, and obstacles for forming intimacy with others through such cases as hook-ups, 
solitary death, solo weddings, domestic violence, human/non-human attachments, and migrancy. Instructor: 
Allison. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 250, Sociology 240, Study of Ethics 240
241. Migrant China. CCI, CZ, SS Introduction to the study of contemporary China, including Taiwan and the 
Chinese Diaspora. Key themes include family and kinship, sex and gender, regional diversity, ethnic minority 
relations, the politics of modernity, revolution, and reform, and the representation of Chinese identity through 
popular media, film, and travel. Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 231, 
Marxism and Society, International Comparative Studies
243. Culture and Politics in Latin America. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Key themes in Latin American societies, 
including art, literature, history, violence and human rights, economic development, and rebellion and 
revolution. Instructor: Nelson or Starn. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 325, Marxism and 
Society, Documentary Studies
245S. Human Rights in the Americas. CCI, CZ, W This course introduces students to the history of 
human rights in Latin America, with a focus on certain regions. We will begin with the Conquest and cover 
the emergence of independent nation-states; the role of imposed economic policies, including neoliberalism; 
indigenous protest movements and their relationships to corporate interests; and the influence of the United 
States on human rights, government formation, immigration and the drug trade. Instructor consent required. 
Open only to students in the DukeImmerse program. Instructor: Kirk. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies 
246S, History 242S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 245S, Human Rights, International 
Comparative Studies
246S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 347S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 236S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 246S, Human Rights
250. Muslim World: Transformations and Continuities. CCI, SS The diversity of social practices within 
the community of Islam. Particular emphasis on gender relations, religious movements, diaspora communities, 
and social change. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Religion 380, International Comparative Studies 170, 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
251S. School Dropout and Educational Policy. CCI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Education 310S; also 
C-L: Public Policy 244S
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands. CCI, EI, SS, STS Americas borderlands 
refers to the intersection of North and Latin America through the movement of people, products, ideas, and 
technologies with focus on culture and agri-culture, including the production of food and pharmaceuticals-legal 
and illegal; explores dirt as concept of matter out of place and people without place and how sustenance can 



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 267

become poison; examines histories of Latin American bodies as “terrain” for US-based scientific experiments. 
Instructor: Nelson. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 254, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 254, International Comparative Studies 254, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
255. World of Korean Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 171; 
also C-L: Literature 212, Visual and Media Studies 234
256. Islamic Civilization I. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 375; also C-L: History 210, Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 268, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 122, Information Science + Studies, Islamic 
Studies, Ethics Elective
257. Islamic Civilization II. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 376; also C-L: History 211, Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 269, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 185, Islamic Studies, International Comparative 
Studies, Ethics Elective
258S. Our Culinary Cultures. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 344S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 344S
259S. Around the Bloc: Cold War Culture in the USSR and Eastern Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 240S; also C-L: Literature 241S
261D. Race, Genomics, and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 261D; also C-L: Science & Society 258D, Global Health 258D, Biology 261D, Visual and Media Studies 
274D
262S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
350S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 225S, Visual and Media Studies 213S, Public Policy 387S, 
International Comparative Studies 368S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 350S, Human 
Rights
263. Black Europe: Race, Ethnicity and Diaspora in Contemporary Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Exploration of the historical and contemporary presence and impact of the African diaspora throughout 
Europe. Course engages an anthropological examination of ethnographic texts, including examples of biography, 
film and visual culture. Instructor: McIntosh. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 263
263S. Black Europe: Race, Ethnicity and Diaspora in Contemporary Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Exploration of the historical and contemporary presence and impact of the African diaspora throughout 
Europe. Course engages an anthropological examination of ethnographic texts, including examples of biography, 
film and visual culture. Instructor: McIntosh. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 263S
269. Black Gods and Kings: Priests and Practices of the Afro-Atlantic Religions. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Surveys the spiritual, political and economic experience of those who worship African gods—West and 
Central Africans, Cubans, Brazilians, Haitians, and North Americans. The gods as sources of power, organization 
and healing amid local political dominance of Muslims and Christians and seismic expansion of international 
capitalism. West African Yoruba religion, West-Central African Kongo religion, Brazilian Candomblé and 
Umbanda, Cuban Santería and Palo Mayombe, Haitian Vodou, and African American Pentecostalism are 
examined as belief systems, and contextualized to the trans-Atlantic slave trade, long-distance commerce 
and pilgrimage by free people. Instructor: Matory. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 269, 
Religion 270
271. Gender and Culture. CCI, SS Explanation of differing beliefs about gender cross-culturally, by 
comparison with dominant themes about gender in our own cultural history and contemporary ideological 
struggles. Instructor: Allison or Silverblatt. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 203, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 217, Study of Sexualities, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
275T-1. Voices in Cultural Anthropology: Advertising in Spanish. Discussion-based course trains 
students to analyze all forms of advertising in Spanish, typically in conjunction with the lecture course 
Advertising and Society (Cultural Anthropology 170/Linguistics 170, Sociology 160, Visual & Media Studies 170). 
Classes explore the history and theories of advertising in the Hispanophone world, as well as hands-on strategies 
for analyzing ads, with particular attention to issues such as translation, localization, and ethics. Tutorials meet 
weekly for 75 minutes. Recommended prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course. 
C-L: Spanish 275T-1



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)268

275T-2. Voices in Cultural Anthropology: Advertising in French. Discussion-based course trains 
students to analyze all forms of advertising in French, typically in conjunction with the lecture course 
Advertising and Society (Cultural Anthropology 170/Linguistics 170, Sociology 160, Visual & Media Studies 170). 
Classes explore the history and theories of advertising in the Francophone world, as well as hands-on strategies 
for analyzing ads, with particular attention to issues such as translation, localization, and ethics. Tutorials meet 
weekly for 75 minutes. Recommended prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course. 
C-L: French 275T-2
278. Sex/Gender - Nature/Nurture: Intersections of Biology and Society. NS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 278; also C-L: Neuroscience 278, Psychology 226, Study of 
Sexualities 278
280S. Ethics of Ethnography: In the Field and on the Page. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Writing 
280S
283S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
283S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 249S, History 397S, Islamic Studies
284. Ritual, Performance, and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 284; also C-L: 
Dance 284, Visual and Media Studies 285, International Comparative Studies 266
285SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas. EI, SS One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 283SL; also C-L: African & African American Studies 283SL, Latin American Studies 
283SL, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 283SL, Latin American Studies, Human Rights
290. Current Issues in Anthropology. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or area. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Cultural Anthropology. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Current Issues in Anthropology. Same as Cultural Anthropology 290 except instruction is provided 
in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. With consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. One course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. With consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295S. Anthropology of Childhood. CCI, SS, W What does it mean to be–and to raise–a child? This course 
begins with the premise that childhood has existed, and continues to exist, in myriad forms. Using the tools of 
anthropology we will ask a series of questions: how do definitions of childhood and childrearing vary across 
history and culture? How do children’s daily lives differ from place to place and how are race, class and gender 
linked to discourses and experiences of childhood and childrearing? What role does education – formal and 
informal – play in shaping childhood? Furthermore, how do children stand in as symbols of broader political 
and cultural concerns? Instructor: Wesolowski. One course.
298S. Global Humanitarianism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see International Comparative Studies 
398S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 298S
301. Theoretical Foundations of Cultural Anthropology. CCI, SS Major schools and theories of cultural 
anthropology. Open to seniors and juniors. Sophomores by permission only. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Marxism and Society, International Comparative Studies
302. Fieldwork Methods: Cultural Analysis and Interpretation. EI, R, SS, W Anthropology 
as a discipline (a field of study) and the site where anthropologists work: the field. Combines theories of 
anthropological fieldwork methods with practice, including participation, observation, and interviews. Students 
undertake original research in a local fieldsite of their choice and produce their own mini-ethnography. This 
requirement may also be satisfied by taking Cultural Anthropology 290A Duke in Ghana Anthropological Field 



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 269

Research. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 302, Global Health
303S. Theory Today: Introduction to the Study of Literature. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 
301S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 301S
304SA. Women and Gender in the Middle East. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 303SA; also C-L: Political Science 213SA
305S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 347S; also C-L: History 385S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
305S, Human Rights
306. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 306; also C-L: 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 306, Global Health 326, Human Rights
307. Development and Africa. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 307; 
also C-L: Public Policy 207, International Comparative Studies 308, Marxism and Society
310S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies). CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 310S; also C-L: Public Policy 218S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
218S, Human Rights
311S. Dancing States of Mind: The Self, Social and Political Practice of Dance. ALP, R One course. 
C-L: see Dance 309S; also C-L: Theater Studies 309S, International Comparative Studies 309S
312. War and Public Health in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 312; also C-L: Public Policy 333, Global Health 312, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 312, Human Rights
315. Africa, Youth and Democracy. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
315
322. The Modern Caribbean after Emancipation. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 321; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 240, Romance Studies 321, International Comparative Studies 319
323. Fundamentals of Global Mental Health. R, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 363; also C-L: 
Psychology 323
327S. Migrations. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 327S
329S. Undocumented America in Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 330S; also C-L: Literature 329S, Romance Studies 330S
330S. Narratives of Migration. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 397S; also C-L: Linguistics 397S, 
International Comparative Studies 330S
332S. Race in Durham. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 341S; also C-L: 
History 339S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 336S, Human Rights
333S. The Wire. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 333S
335. The History of Hip-Hop. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 335; also 
C-L: Music 335, Visual and Media Studies 337, English 381
336. Hollywood and Africa: Case Studies in Filmic Representation. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 337; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 337
341. Life and Death: Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Anthropological investigation of customs, 
practices, and beliefs that get activated when people (and other living beings) die. What constitutes life as in 
when does it start, what determines well-being, how is it measured; and what constitutes death as in a good 
versus bad death, by what medical definition, and according to what rituals and beliefs. Comparative inquiry 
into such questions as why brain-death is not accepted in some cultures and why people in some places prefer 
to die rather than live after an amputation. Topics will include organ transplants, gang warfare, cancer, and 
warzones from China and Botswana to Mexico and the United States. Instructor: Allison. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 353, Global Health 353, Sociology 351
342. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking. ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)270

African & African American Studies 343; also C-L: Latin American Studies 343, Sociology 343, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 339, Human Rights
343A. Themes in Chinese Culture and History. CCI, CZ, SS An interdisciplinary approach to explore 
political, social, and cultural issues, both historical and contemporary, in China. (Taught in China) Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: History 224A, Political Science 298A, International Comparative Studies
345S. Energy Futures and Environmental Justice. CCI, SS, STS Advanced undergraduate seminar 
on comparative energy crises and natural resource management. Uses case studies of fossil fuel, nuclear, and 
renewable energy resources drawn from anthropology, natural sciences, and even business economic readings. 
Appropriate for students interested in interested in global politics, economic development, human rights, or 
environmental issues. Instructor: Folch. One course. C-L: Environment 343S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 334S, Human Rights
346S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials. 
ALP, EI This seminar introduces students to multiple approaches to how to create memory, with a focus on 
building a proposal for Duke to expand the sites where stories are told. We are particularly interested in how to 
tell difficult stories of slavery, segregation and inequality through new sites and interpretive plans. Students will 
create a Duke memory map and develop a Story Bank. The class is in part funded by Bass Connections and is 
affiliated with the Story Lab. Instructor: Kirk. One course. C-L: History 350S, Public Policy 347S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 346S, Human Rights
347S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide. CCI, CZ, EI, SS The university generates some 
of the most influential forms of knowledge in the world, yet we seldom examine the historically specific cultural, 
social, political, and economic conditions under which knowledge is produced in the laboratories, classrooms, 
offices, dormitories, Greek-letter societies, and sports complexes that are the infrastructure of the academy. This 
course will employ readings from a range of disciplines, as well as the investigative and interpretive methods 
of cultural anthropology, to examine the taken-for-granted context of university life. Instructor: Matory. One 
course. C-L: Education 347S, History 334S, Sociology 324S, Public Policy 350S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 347S, Human Rights
347T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling. 
ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS This is affiliated with a Bass Connections project that takes on the societal and cultural 
challenge of historical memory, human rights and memorialization. We intend to mine memory studies to ask 
how, why and where people use the past for contemporary meaning; how the Duke campus currently embodies 
and tell its story; and how this team can help chart a deeper engagement with history. Consent of instructor is 
required. Instructor: Kirk. One course. C-L: History 340T, Public Policy 340T, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 346T, Human Rights
348A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: 
see Spanish 344A; also C-L: Music 325A, Latin American Studies, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
350. Anthropology of Money. CCI, CZ, EI, SS We will explore the history and theory of money – what it 
represents, how it circulates, the meanings it carries, its contemporary transformations – not only in the West 
but also in the global south. Some of the topics to be considered include shell currencies, gift economies, Ponzi 
schemes, paperless money, derivatives and futures, hedge funds, and global debt. Instructor: Piot. One course. 
C-L: Economics 309, Public Policy 306, International Comparative Studies 328, African & African American 
Studies 211
352A. From Enlightenment Culture to Popular Culture. CCI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 
352A; also C-L: Sociology 252A
360. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS Examination of the 
Apple Corporation’s development from a Silicon Valley garage operation to a company with unprecedented 
global reach; the Cult of Steve Jobs, the Apple Launch and use the design and development of the Apple Store; 
labor and environmental struggles over Apple supply chain and production processes, from cobalt mining in 
Africa to Foxconn factories in China; migrant worker suicide and poetry as forms of protest in China; e-waste 
villages and digital rubbish; everyday uses of Apple technology and the ethics of consuming Apple products. 
Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: Literature 361, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 360, Sociology 360, 
International Comparative Studies 369



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 271

360S. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS Examination of the 
Apple Corporation’s development from a Silicon Valley garage operation to a company with unprecedented 
global reach; the Cult of Steve Jobs, the Apple Launch and use the design and development of the Apple Store; 
labor and environmental struggles over Apple supply chain and production processes, from cobalt mining in 
Africa to Foxconn factories in China; migrant worker suicide and poetry as forms of protest in China; e-waste 
villages and digital rubbish; everyday uses of Apple technology and the ethics of consuming Apple products. 
Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: Literature 361S, Public Policy 358S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
360S, Sociology 360S, International Comparative Studies 369S
361S. African Cities, Development, and Climate Change. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 397S
364S. Minor Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 469S
365S. The World of Japanese Pop Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 165S
366S. Trauma and Space in Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
410S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 410S
367S. Mayas, Aztecs, and Incas: The World According to the Indigenous People of Latin America. 
CZ, EI, FL, R One course. C-L: see Spanish 412S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 460S, Latino/a 
Studies in the Global South 412S
368. Visualizing the Caribbean. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
321; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 318, Latin American Studies 321
382SA. Transnational Muslims in Germany: Politics of Migration, Religion, and Culture. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 380SA; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 323SA, International Comparative Studies 278SA, Religion 382SA
383. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 383; also C-L: History 237, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 343
383A. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 383A; also C-L: History 
237A, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 343A
385S. Race, Gender and Culture of the African Diaspora. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 385S
389S. Food, Culture, and Society. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Italian 388S; also C-L: Sociology 
388S
390SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Cultural Anthropology. Topics differ 
by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393A-1. Research Independent Study on Contemporary China. R Research and field studies 
culminating in a paper approved and supervised by the resident director of the Duke in China Program. Includes 
field trips on cultural and societal changes in contemporary China. Offered only in the Duke in China Program. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
396AS. Health Policy in Transition: Challenges for China. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS Critical introduction 
to the dynamics and challenges of health policy in China, from the early twentieth century to the present, with 
a particular focus on the reform period. Topics to be addressed: health care and economic development, state 
responsibility and welfare systems, privatization, and disparities in access to health services; history of state 
policy on regional health planning, community health services, rural health provisions in poverty areas, and 
the developments in public health infrastructure urban and rural settings. Instructor consent required. Course 
taught in China as part of the Global Study Abroad Program. Instructor: Guo and Litzinger. One course. C-L: 
Global Health
397S. Language in Immigrant America. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 396S; also C-L: 
Linguistics 396S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 396S, International Comparative Studies 396S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 396S, Human Rights
399. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 399; also C-L: Public Policy 223, 



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)272

International Comparative Studies 399, Markets and Management Studies
399A. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 399A; also C-L: Public Policy 399A, 
International Comparative Studies 399A
403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Explores political contexts, and often 
competing visions, surrounding construction and reproduction of public memory. Asks how sites of memory, 
presenting an image of the past, express understandings, desires, and conflicts of the present. Particular focus 
on how times of crisis and trauma are commemorated, challenged, or hidden. Open only to juniors and seniors. 
Instructor: Silverblatt. One course. C-L: History 403S, International Comparative Studies 403S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 403S, Human Rights
406S. South African Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 406S; also C-L: History 450S, Political Science 406S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 406S, Public Policy 406S
409. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 409; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 
409, Sociology 409, Latin American Studies 409
414S. Research in Human Rights. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 414S; also C-L: 
History 414S
415S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 415S; also C-L: Literature 415S, Visual and Media Studies 416S, International 
Comparative Studies 415S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 415S
417S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film. CCI, CZ, SS Studying the Middle East through the lens 
of popular culture, with a focus on the cultural changes of the digital era. Focus on social media, film, graphic 
novels, amateur cameras. Studies how popular cultural forms relate to concurrent political and historical 
processes. Themes include: digital media and society, state violence and terrorism, human rights, sexuality 
and youth culture. Instructor: Stein. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 215S, Visual and Media 
Studies 417S, International Comparative Studies 417S, Islamic Studies
418S. Meaning, Mattering, and Black Being-in-the-World: Towards a Critical Theory of Race and 
Value. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see International Comparative Studies 419S; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 419S
419S. Global Environmentalism and the Politics of Nature. CCI, CZ, SS, STS Exploration of several 
themes: how local, national, and transnational organizations manage the environment, discuss it, study it, 
protect and defend it; who speaks for nature and to what ends; the differences between capitalist and socialist 
approaches to the environment; how relations among natures, nations, social movements, individuals, and 
institutions have changed over time. Case studies from Africa, East and Southeast Asia, India, Latin America, 
and the United States; study of new theoretical writing on the relationship between humans, technology, 
capital, and nature. Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies, Marine Science and 
Conservation
422. Myth, Ritual, Symbol. CCI, CZ, SS, W Cross cultural examination of roles of myths, rituals, and 
symbols in meaning-making, creation of identity, reproduction of cultural forms and challenges to the 
construction of “normal.” Draws on ethnography, classical anthropological theory, film and participant-
observation. Explores functionalist, psychoanalytic, structuralist, and feminist modes of analysis. Culture areas 
include Ndembu of Zambia, Maya of Guatemala, Turkish village life, Nazi Germany, and present-day United 
States. Instructor: Nelson. One course.
423. Sex and Money. CCI, SS Sexual practices that involve transactions of money in different cultural and 
historical settings, including “regular” marriage practices that involve exchanges of money and goods as well 
as extramarital practices where one party is selling bodily acts. Examination of the ethics and politics of these 
exchanges questioning who benefits from them (and who not) and how to also assess other bodily transactions 
including prostitution and surrogacy. Reading materials on sexual practices in different cultural contexts 
(including Tonga, Thailand, Brazil, India, Ghana, China, Japan, Russia, Turkey, Indonesia). Comparisons made 
in terms of culture, religion, ethical systems, politics, and economy. Instructor: Allison. One course. C-L: Islamic 



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 273

Studies, Marxism and Society
424-1. Medical Anthropology. CCI, EI, SS, STS Cross-cultural study of health and illness. Prerequisites: 
Completion of both Writing 101 and any First Year Seminar. Instructor: Solomon. One course. C-L: Global 
Health 321-1, International Comparative Studies 424-1
425. Globalization and Anti-Globalization. CCI, CZ, SS The politics and process of globalization in light 
of the responses, ideologies, and practices of the anti-globalization movement. Focus on the interrelationship 
between the analysis of globalization and policy formulation on such topics as social justice, labor, migration, 
poverty, natural resource management, and citizenship. Case studies from the United States, Latin America, 
South and East Asia, Africa, and Europe. Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 404, Markets and Management Studies
432S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship. CCI, EI, SS Explore current issues and debates relating to the 
relationship between gender, sexuality and global flows of people, labor, capital and ideas. Consider feminist 
analyses of the citizen-subject and foundational questions central to this area of study relationship between 
cultural representation, queer subjectivities, and sexual citizenship. Examine scholarship on gendered 
vulnerability and the welfare state; the politics of ‘terror’, security, and stereotyped masculinities; domestic labor 
and contemporary slavery; and the controversial debates about the connections between sex tourism, human 
trafficking and commercial sex work. Prerequisite: Previous gender studies course or consent of the instructor. 
Instructor: McIntosh. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 432S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 432S, 
International Comparative Studies 428S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 428S, Human 
Rights
434S. Cultures of New Media. ALP, SS, STS Anthropological look at ‘new media’—their varied forms and 
histories, how they are used and understood, and their meanings and effects within different communities of 
users. Charts a number of technologies deemed ‘new’ in their day and the social meanings and communities 
that such technologies generated. Explores new media in domains of art and literature, as well as issues of 
race, gender, sexuality and how other indices of difference come to bear on new media and its use. Grounded in 
anthropology, readings will also draw on media studies, visual studies, cultural studies and critical theory, queer 
and gender theory, history and geography. Instructor: Stein. One course. C-L: Literature 412S, Visual and Media 
Studies 412S, International Comparative Studies 432S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 425S
438S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 438S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 407S, Study 
of Sexualities 438S, Visual and Media Studies 438S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 438S, Literature 
438S, International Comparative Studies
439. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 439; also C-L: 
Literature 439, Visual and Media Studies 439, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 439
440S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 240S; also C-L: Literature 249S, Political Science 248S, International Comparative 
Studies 265S, Visual and Media Studies 214S, Information Science + Studies 242S, Information Science + 
Studies
450S. The Global Caribbean. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
450S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 418S, Sociology 450S, Latin American Studies 450S
463S. Nightmare Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 463S
465S. Global Cities. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 465S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 465S, International Comparative Studies
470S. Capstone: Research in Human Rights. R, W A primary learning objective is to have students 
connect the intellectual themes and scholarly knowledge they have developed in the Gateway, Introduction to 
Human Rights, and the electives they have taken toward the Human Rights Certificate. The course integrates 
co-curricular rights-related experiences (through DukeEngage, DukeImmerse, internships and volunteer 
placements). The capstone culminates in a final project. Students may work in teams toward a final project so 
long as each student’s work is evaluated separately and at a high standard. Prerequisite: Cultural Anthropology 
104D. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Kirk. One course. C-L: Environment 



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)274

470S, History 488S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 470S, Human Rights
473. Two Koreas: History, Society and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 372; also C-L: History 473
481. Living, Dying, Healing in Russia. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 481; also C-L: Global 
Health 481
490. Advanced Special Topics in Cultural Anthropology. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or 
area. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics. Advanced Special Topics in Cultural Anthropology. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Latino/as in the Global South Capstone - Global/Local Contexts. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Latino/a Studies in the Global South 495S; also C-L: Latin American Studies 495S, Romance Studies 495S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 495S
498S. Senior Seminar Distinction Program Sequence. R No credit for Cultural Anthropology 498S 
without satisfactory completion of Cultural Anthropology 499S. Students who wish to exit the Senior Seminar 
Distinction Program sequence after completion of 498S must petition the course instructor, their advisor, and 
the director of undergraduate studies. The student will be given course credit and a final grade provided the 
instructor, their advisor, and the director of undergraduate studies determine the student has done adequate 
work. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
499S. Senior Seminar Distinction Program Sequence. W Continuation of Cultural Anthropology 498S 
and required for credit for 498S. Students who wish to exit the Senior Seminar Distinction Program sequence 
after completion of 498S must petition the course instructor, their advisor and the director of undergraduate 
studies. The student will be given course credit and a final grade provided the instructor, the student’s advisor, 
and the director of undergraduate studies determine the student has done adequate work. Consent of director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
501S. Anthropology and History. SS Recent scholarship that combines anthropology and history, including 
culture history, ethnohistory, the study of mentalité, structural history, and cultural biography. The value of 
the concept of culture to history and the concepts of duration and event for anthropology. Prerequisite: major 
in history, one of the social sciences, or comparative area studies; or graduate standing. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: History 572S, Romance Studies 521S
502S. Race, Class, and Gender in the University. CCI, CZ, EI, SS The American university generates 
some of the most influential ideas and policies on the planet. It is the product of culture-specific ideas and 
aspirations, as well as a long history of selective social exclusion, inclusion, and transformation. Yet most of us 
take for granted the culture-specific forms of reasoning, discourses, political loyalties, administrative practices, 
social relationships, and financial flows that constitute it. Through theoretical, historical, ethnographic, 
statistical, policy-oriented, novelistic, and journalistic accounts, we will de-naturalize and historicize the power/
knowledge that not only forms us but also, in many ways, rules the world. Instructor: Matory. One course. C-L: 
History 513S, Sociology 502S
503S. Moments in Black (Radical) Theory: From Ferguson to Rhodes Must Fall to Silent Sam. 
CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 503S; also C-L: Religion 503S, Political 
Science 589S, International Comparative Studies 504S
511S. The Fetish: The Role of Things in Spiritual, Economic, and Sexual Life. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 512S; also C-L: Religion 511S
520. Eco-Media: Studies in Planetary Futures. CCI, CZ, SS This course explores film, photography, 
online media, museum and artistic productions about the contemporary planetary ecological crisis. Visual 
materials will focus on climate change, environmental activism, plastic and nuclear waste, digital rubbish, 
“cancer alleys” and “cancer villages,” pollution and toxic environments, among other topics. Course readings will 
introduce students to debates about the Anthropocene, post-human natues, species extinction, multi-species 
care, geo-engineering, and planetary futures. Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: Literature 522, Visual and 
Media Studies 520
520S. Eco-Media: Studies in Planetary Futures. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This seminar explores film, 
photography, online media, museum and artistic productions about the contemporary planetary ecological 



Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH) 275

crisis. Visual materials will focus on climate change, environmental activism, plastic and nuclear waste, digital 
rubbish, “cancer alleys” and “cancer villages,” pollution and toxic environments, among other topics. Course 
readings will introduce students to debates about the Anthropocene, post-human natures, species extinction, 
multi-species care, geo-engineering, and planetary futures. Instructor: Litzinger. One course. C-L: Literature 
522S, Visual and Media Studies 520S
525S. Culture, Power, History. CCI, SS Debates in cultural theory and anthropology: identity and 
nationalism, memory and tradition, globalization, and poststructuralist, feminist and postcolonial theory. Some 
previous coursework in anthropology and or cultural theory recommended. Instructor: Starn and Stein. One 
course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 525S
530S. Millennial Capitalisms: Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, R, SS Critical examination of the 
problematic of capital from the late nineteenth century until the present moment. Anthropological frameworks 
and related disciplinary approaches to the multiple cultural productions and lived experiences under divergent 
forms of capitalism in the new millennium. Theories of capitalism, globalization and anti-globalization 
movements, “imaginaries” and fantasies, nature and the virtual, consumption, and disciplinary practices of the 
body. Instructor: Staff. One course.
533. Culture and Explosion: How Russian Culture Changed the World. ALP, CCI, CZ, STS One 
course. C-L: see Russian 533; also C-L: Public Policy 508
535S. Race, Racism, and Democracy. CCI, SS, W The paradox of racial inequality in societies that 
articulate principles of equality, democratic freedom, and justice for all. Instructor: Baker. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 545S
539S. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 539S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 502S, Literature 539S, Visual and Media Studies 539S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 539S, Human Rights
540S. Masculinities. CCI, CZ, R, SS How masculinities are constructed, performed and inhabited. 
Theorization of the masculine subject in sociocultural, political and psychodynamic terms within colonial 
and modernizing contexts. Issues of gendered citizenship. Role of scholarship and the media in constituting 
hegemonic, subaltern, ethnic, female, and stigmatized masculinities. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 581S
545S. Transnationalism and Public Culture. CCI, SS Critical examination of issues in transnational 
studies in anthropology and beyond. Tracking the theories of contemporary scholars of the global, and 
examining new multisited strategies of method, we explore the emerging ethnographic landscape of the global 
and the role transnational studies is playing in a revitalized anthropology of the twenty-first century. Instructor: 
Piot. One course.
555S. Development, Modernity, and Social Movements. CCI, SS Modernization and ideologies of 
progress and nationalism; social movements, revolution, and political protest in the United States and around 
the world. Some prior background in cultural anthropology or social theory preferred. Consent of instructor 
required for undergraduate students. Instructor: Starn. One course.
560S. African Modernities. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 645S; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies
561S. Global Africa. CCI, EI, SS Africa’s participation in globalization has not simply been a matter of 
“joining the world economy.” Rather, Africa’s inclusion has been selective, uneven, and partial. This is quite a 
different proposition than arguing, as many social theorists, economists, and journalists have suggested that the 
Continent is somehow structurally irrelevant to the process of globalization. This course responds to this debate 
by retracing the history of globalization, beginning with the Atlantic trade in human beings and concluding with 
an account of Africa’s place in the global circulation of people things, ideas, and currencies in early twenty-first 
century. Instructor: Makhulu. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 510S, History 561S, Political 
Science 527S, International Comparative Studies 510S
562S. African Cities. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 640S
563S. Nightmare Japan. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 563S
565S. The World of Japanese Pop Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 



 Cultural Anthropology (CULANTH)276

Eastern Studies 565S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
570S. Ethnohistory of Latin America. CCI, CZ, R, SS Analysis of what can be known about nonwestern 
cultures described in texts written by European colonizers. Focus on native peoples whose lives were 
transformed by Spanish colonialism, with particular attention to post-Inca Andean Societies. Instructor: 
Silverblatt. One course. C-L: History 540S, Literature 573S
590. Selected Topics. Special topics in methodology, theory, or area. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Seminar in Selected Topics. Same as Cultural Anthropology 590 except instruction provided in 
seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
594S. Cultural (Con)Fusions of Asians and Africans. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 594S; also C-L: Latin American Studies 594S, Sociology 594S
605. East Asian Cultural Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
605; also C-L: Literature 571, International Comparative Studies 605, International Comparative Studies
610S. Africa, Cuba, Brazil: Great Powers of the Black Atlantic. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 610S; also C-L: History 610S, Romance Studies 522S
611. Global Mental Health. CCI, NS, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Global Health 660; also C-L: 
Psychology 611, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 660, Human Rights
641S. Citizen and Subject in a Neoliberal Age. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 641S; also C-L: Sociology 645S
660. Health in the African Diaspora. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 660; also C-L: Global Health 672

The Major
Major Requirements. A total of ten courses distributed in the following manner: Cultural Anthropology 

101, 301, and 302; six courses at the 100 level or above, including at least one at the 400 level or above; one 
additional cultural anthropology course at any level. Students must take at least five of their ten courses with 
instructors whose primary appointment is in the Department of Cultural Anthropology. No more than three 
courses may be transferred from other institutions or study abroad.

Suggested Work in Related Disciplines. Related courses in other departments are strongly advised. 
Each student’s advisor will recommend a program of related work to complement the student’s concentration and 
interests in cultural anthropology. 

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers an intensive and personalized Graduation with Distinction program to qualified 

seniors, who research and write a senior thesis on a topic of their own choice in close collaboration with members 
of the cultural anthropology faculty. Admission to the program requires a 3.0 grade point average overall and a 
3.3 grade point average in the major, both of which must be maintained to graduation for the student to be eligible 
for distinction. Qualified juniors will be notified each year by the director of undergraduate studies about their 
eligibility. To pursue distinction, students must then enroll in the senior seminar, Cultural Anthropology 498S 
and Cultural Anthropology 499S, in the fall and spring of their senior year, where they will learn about research 
methods and prepare a thesis. Credit for Cultural Anthropology 498S and Cultural Anthropology 499S is given for 
a passing grade whether or not the student is awarded distinction. The thesis can be based on original fieldwork 
on a topic of the student’s choice, archival or library research, or some combination of various anthropological 
methods. Previous topics have ranged from studies of the influence of feminism in cultural anthropology to causes 
of revolution in Latin America, patterns of socialization of Mormon youth in Utah, music in the African diaspora 
(drawing on summer study in Ghana), and the consolidation of Korean-American identity through the 1992 Los 
Angeles rebellion. The student also forms a supervisory committee for the thesis during the fall of the senior 
year. It should consist of three faculty members who offer the student advice and support in preparing the thesis. 
At least two of the members must be faculty from the cultural anthropology department. Due in April of the 
senior year, the thesis must be judged of at least B+ quality by the supervisory committee to receive distinction. 



Dance (DANCE) 277

In addition, the student must pass an oral examination on the thesis, which is given on its completion by the 
supervisory committee, and present their findings to the public. Students who fulfill the above requirements 
graduate with distinction in cultural anthropology.

A typical sequence would be: select a research topic; take the senior seminar in fall and spring; form a 
supervisory committee; complete the research and writing by April and submit the final draft to the supervisory 
committee; schedule the oral defense for some time in early or mid-April; defend the thesis in an oral examination 
given by the supervisory committee. 

The Minor
Requirements. A total of five courses distributed in the following manner: Cultural Anthropology 101; 

three courses at the 200 level or above; and one additional course at any level (this may include courses taken in 
the Focus Program).

Dance
Associate Professor of the Practice Shah, Director of the Program; Associate Professor of the Practice Vinesett, 
Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professor DeFrantz; Professor of the Practice Khalsa; Associate Professors of 
the Practice Klien and Woods Valdés; Associate Professor of the Practice of Ballet T. Walters; Assistant Professor 
of the Practice Wilbur; Professors of the Practice Emeriti Dickinson and  Taliaferro; Associate Professor of the 
Practice Emeritus Dorrance; Assistant Professor of the Practice Emeritus J. Walters

A major and a minor are available in this program.
The Duke University Dance Program focuses on dance as an integral part of the human experience and 

a medium for rigorous intellectual creativity. Our aim is to engage students in the profound potential for dance 
as embodied knowledge in the service of society. The Dance Program curriculum is designed to encourage the 
exploration of dance from interdisciplinary perspectives: historical, cultural, aesthetic, literary, technological, 
musical, scientific and creative. 

The Dance Program welcomes all students, regardless of the extent of their experience in dance. The 
curriculum provides opportunities to encounter dance traditions and movement experimentation as processes 
for discovery, communication, inquiry and discourse. Students already deeply engaged in specific dance forms 
can explore and further enhance their physical, performance, and creative capacities. Students will experience 
dance as a mode for personal development and leadership, and as a transformative force for social action. As 
the landscape of dance continues to evolve, Duke Dance Program students will gain the knowledge and skills to 
impact the nature and function of dance in contemporary society and reimagine the future of performance. They 
will move into action, agency, and sustainability with tools that can transform relationships locally and globally.

Students are encouraged to enroll in a summer session with the American Dance Festival. One course credit 
earned at the American Dance Festival may be counted toward the requirements of the major or minor.

Through the Duke in New York Arts Program a student has the opportunity in the fall semester of the junior 
or senior year to pursue the study of the arts in New York City. Appropriate courses taken at New York University 
may fulfill a requirement of the major or minor.

Fifteen hours total of service work are required of each student majoring in dance, and ten hours total of 
service work are required of each student minoring in dance. This requirement may be completed at any time 
during the four-year undergraduate experience.

Courses in Dance (DANCE)

Technique and Performance Courses (Half Credit) 
110. Elementary Modern Dance. Technical and artistic training in the modern dance idiom through 
technique, improvisation and composition. First steps in developing skill, clarity and motivational intent as well 
as strength and flexibility. No previous dance experience necessary. Instructor: Khalsa or staff. Half course.
116. Alexander Technique for Musicians, Dancers, and Actors. ALP Half course. C-L: see Music 116; 
also C-L: Theater Studies 247
120. Beginning Ballet. Basic classical ballet technique, body alignment, vocabulary, and musicality for the 
absolute beginner. Barre and center exercises included. Instructor: Staff. Half course.



 Dance (DANCE)278

121. Advanced Beginning Ballet. Barre work concentrating on body alignment and correct placement within 
the ballet vocabulary followed by center adagio and allegro sequences. Prerequisite: a semester of ballet or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
122. Intermediate Ballet. Barre work concentrating on body alignment and correct placement within the 
ballet vocabulary followed by center adagio and allegro sequences. Prerequisite: Dance 121 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
130. African Dance Technique I. Introduction to African dance styles and related rhythmic structures 
from selected countries such as Guinea, Senegal, Nigeria and Cote d’Ivoire. Taught in the context of their social, 
occupational, and religious functions. Instructor: A. Vinesett. Half course.
131. Capoeira: Brazilian Dance/Martial Art. Introduction to Capoeira, the dynamic art form that emerged 
in Brazil during the era of the Atlantic Slave Trade and blends music, ritual, acrobatic movement, and combat. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
132L. African Dance Percussion. Practice in rhythms and techniques of selected West African, Afro-
Brazilian and Haitian percussion. Integration of music and dance will be a focal point, experienced through 
live accompaniment of African Dance. Includes two sessions per week, one with the instructor and one with the 
dance class. Instruments include: dun-dun, djembe, atabaques, congas and bells. Instructor: R. Vinesett. Half 
course. C-L: Music 132L
140. Jazz Dance I. No previous dance experience required. Instructor: Wheeler. Half course.
142. Hip Hop I. Hip-Hop, an inner-city culture that has created its own art, language, fashion, music and 
dance styles. This is a beginning level of Hip Hop dance. Using dance as a time-line the course explores the 
history, development and core elements of hip-hop dance culture. Instructor: Marrone or staff. Half course.
143. Hip Hop II. Hip-Hop, an inner-city culture that has created its own art, language, fashion, music and 
dance styles. This is the second level of Hip Hop dance and requires previous dance experience with the form. 
Using dance as a time-line the course explores the history, development and core elements of hip-hop dance 
culture. Instructor: Marrone or staff. Half course.
151. Kundalini Yoga. Practice course to experience the components of Kundalini Yoga—breath work 
(pranayam), movement, postures (asanas, mudras), focus techniques (meditation, drishti), use of sound current 
(mantra), and relaxation techniques. For a more intensive study of Kundalini Yoga that includes practice, 
lecture, writing and discussion, see full credit course Dance 357L. Instructor: Khalsa. Half course.
152. Dance Improvisation. Introductory dance studio course exploring states of presence, perception, 
awareness, and responsiveness to one’s self and environment through movement improvisation. Utilizing 
techniques of music visualization, contact improvisation, responding to sensory stimuli (visual, aural, 
kinesthetic) to create movement in the moment, this course is designed to develop freedom of thought and 
expanded personal movement vocabulary. The improvisation techniques range from aerobic to meditative. 
Creative games, spatial awareness, and problem solving are investigated in order to discover the innovative 
language of the body. Disability is not a limitation. Instructor: Wilbur, Khalsa. Half course.
160. Intelligence in Motion: Conceptualizing & Performing Dance Through Somatic 
Principles. Focus on practice and performance of contemporary dance movement and classical/contemporary 
ballet utilizing somatic principals. Conducted in a workshop environment. Sessions will investigate deeper 
conceptual structures embedded in various somatic methods in relation to processing movement. Course 
is designed to increase proprioception and kinesthetic awareness and includes basic and complex injury 
prevention techniques. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
161. Flamenco. Flamenco, a dance and music form of Southern Spain forged by a remarkable intercultural 
exchange among Arabic, Judaic and Iberian cultures, and subsequently enriched by rhythms and influences 
from the East Indian gypsies and from Latin America. Introduces the complex footwork, rhythms and physical 
style of flamenco dance. Instructor: Santana. Half course.
210. Intermediate Modern Dance. Increased complexity of movement sequences and greater emphasis 
on clarity of expression and quality of performance. Prerequisite: Dance 110 or equivalent dance training. 
Prerequisite: Dance 111 or equivalent. Instructor: Khalsa, Woods Valdés, or staff. Half course.
220. Advanced Intermediate Ballet. Greater complexity of barre and center sequences with increased 



Dance (DANCE) 279

emphasis on correctness of style and quality of performance. Prerequisite: Dance 122 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
230. African Dance Technique II. Continuation of Dance 130. Dances from selected African ethnic groups 
providing increasingly complex movement sequences and rhythmic structures. Emphasis on greater technical 
proficiency, clarity of expression and quality of performance. Taught in the context of their social, occupational 
and religious functions. Prerequisite: Dance 130 or consent of instructor. Instructor: A. Vinesett. Half course.
240. Jazz Dance II. Prerequisite: Dance 140 or equivalent. Instructor: Wheeler. Half course.
280. Individual Dance Program: Special Topics. An individualized program of study of dance technique 
from existing class sessions. Consent of instructor required. Half course.
310. Advanced Modern Dance. Technical and artistic training in the modern dance idiom at an advanced 
level. Increased complexity of movement sequences and emphasis on clarity of expression, musicality, and 
quality of performance. Prerequisite: Dance 210 or equivalent dance training. Prerequisite: Dance 210 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Khalsa, Woods Valdés, or staff. Half course.
314. Thinking through the Body: Becoming an Ordinary Genius. ALP Practice-based studio and 
outdoor work and discussions. Introduces numerous established and experimental artistic methodologies as 
tools to aid the process of creative, associative thinking and the development of new ideas in any chosen field. 
The cultivation of students’ radically subjective creativity, awareness, perception, and imagination in order 
to explore, experience and apply embodied thought, unlocking creative potential and visionary thinking. No 
movement or artistic experience required. Students of all abilities welcome. Instructor: Klien. Half course. C-L: 
Theater Studies 304, Music 314
320. Advanced Ballet. Progression of Dance 220 with increased emphasis on line, style, and performance-
level quality and technique. Diverse batterie, pirouettes, and tours included in allegro combinations. 
Prerequisite: Dance 220 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
321. Pointe and Variations: Advanced Study of Pointe Work for Ballet. Classical and contemporary 
pointe technique and variations. Refinement of the classical style and the exploration of contemporary studies 
en pointe in the ballet lexicon. Training in and analysis of the principles of classical and neoclassical variations 
and their historical and aesthetic context. Development of interpretative skills, enhancement of style and 
performance qualities through coaching and informal showings. Prerequisite: Dance 220 or Dance 320 or Dance 
420 or permission of instructor. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
410. Intensive Modern Dance. Intensive modern dance training at the Intermediate and advanced levels. 
Prerequisite: Dance 310 or equivalent. Instructor: Khalsa, Woods Valdés, or staff. Half course.
412. Performance: Modern. The study of choreography and performance through participation in the 
mounting of a dance work from inception through rehearsal to performance. Separate enrollment in dance 
technique is encouraged. Consent of department required. Instructor: Khalsa, Kliën, Woods Valdés, or staff. 
Half course.
420. Intensive Ballet. Continuation of Dance 320. Daily training for the performing student at the advanced/
professional level. Prerequisite: Dance 320 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
422. Performance: Ballet. The study of choreography and performance through participation in the 
mounting of a dance work from inception through rehearsal to performance. Separate enrollment in dance 
technique is encouraged. Consent of department required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
432. Performance: African. The study of choreography and performance through participation in the 
mounting of a dance work from inception through rehearsal to performance. Separate enrollment in dance 
technique is encouraged. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Vinesett. Half course.
442. Performance: Jazz. Study of choreography and performance through participation in the mounting of 
a dance work in the jazz idiom from inception through rehearsal to performance. Separate enrollment in dance 
technique is encouraged. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Wheeler. Half course.
443. Performance: Tap. The study of choreography and performance through participation in the mounting 
of a dance work from inception through rehearsal to performance. Separate enrollment in a dance technique 
course encouraged. Consent of department required. Instructor: DeFrantz. Half course.



 Dance (DANCE)280

462. Performance: Interdisciplinary. The study of choreography and performance through participation 
in the research and creation of a collaborative art work (or works) from inception through rehearsal to 
performance. Separate enrollment in dance technique is encouraged. Consent of department required. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
472. Performance: Dance Theater. The study of choreography and performance through participation in 
the mounting of a dance work from inception through rehearsal to performance. Separate enrollment in a dance 
technique course required. Consent of department required. Instructor: DeFrantz. Half course.

Theory Courses
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Dance. ALP, CCI Dance as a reflection of historical and current cultural values. 
Introduction to some of the major forms of world dance (for example, classical dances of Europe, Asia and 
Africa, and American modern dance); how dance forms illuminate and define gender, personal and group 
identity, political and religious status, aesthetic values, and the intentions of the dance-makers; dance as an 
educative force, a facilitator of cultural acquisition, and a reflection of cultural change; the function of dance in 
various cultural settings; how to look at dance, to analyze movement, and to read the text of dance structure. 
Instructor: Shah or Wilbur. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 102
105S. Dance Composition. ALP, R The basic elements of movement (time, space, weight, flow) and their 
choreographic applications explored through structured improvisation, short movement studies, viewing of 
videotaped dances, and selected readings. Experimentation with devices for movement manipulation and 
choreographic forms through longer movement studies. Prerequisite: a beginning level dance technique course 
(modern, ballet, jazz, or African) or consent of instructor. Instructor: Khalsa, Woods Valdés, or staff. One course.
135. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
135; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 135
165. Let’s Dance! Live Art and Performance. ALP, CCI, CZ This introductory course offers an 
examination of the major movements in the history of concert and social dance, including ballet, tap, jazz, 
modern dance, musical theater, and particular cultural forms. Considerations of popular culture and reality 
competition dance programs; feminist foundations of modern dance; contemporary performance idioms that 
involve the presence of the body. Instructor: DeFrantz. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 104, Music 165
201S. Arts Entrepreneurship. One course. C-L: see Music 295S; also C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
295S, Visual and Media Studies 295S, Theater Studies 312S, Documentary Studies 295S, Visual Arts 295S
205S. Advanced Dance Composition. ALP, R Focuses on developing your creative voice in movement and 
choreography. Open to dancers of any style. Continuation of the basic movement, choreographic devices and 
forms explored in Dance 105S. Explores the use of props, sets, lighting and costuming, and the relationship of 
music to dance. Choreographing and directing ensembles. Improvisation, choreographic tools, inter-disciplinary 
projects, site specific work, and lots of individual attention to guide students through the creative process. 
Prerequisite: Dance 105S. Instructor: Woods-Valdés or staff. One course.
206S. Solo Performance. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 340S
207S. Performance and Social Change. ALP, EI Service-learning course based on the body of work of 
Brazilian theater director, writer, activist and legislator Augusto Boal. Examination of Boal’s ideology and 
philosophy of “liberatory” theater and physical and vocal exploration of Boal’s “arsenal” of theater techniques. 
Service-learning teams work with community non-profit organizations to lead workshops and/or develop and 
perform interactive Forum theater. Instructor: Khalsa. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 204S, International 
Comparative Studies 227S
208S. Non-Profit Cultural Institutions. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 310S; also C-L: 
Economics 247S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 310S, Visual and Media Studies 329S, Public Policy 318S
211. Musical Theater Workshop: Performance. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 211; also C-L: 
Music 218
215S. Performing Sexual Health: The Duke Sex Ed Squad. ALP, CCI Service-Learning course exploring 
the history, theories, and strategies behind activist sexual health education theatre as it has been used locally 



Dance (DANCE) 281

and globally. Intensive training on sex, sexuality, HIV/AIDS, and history of artists’ interventions to open urgent 
dialogues. Examination of humor, personal narrative, and non-judgmental, sex-positive approaches to open 
dialogue about sexual health by and for diverse communities. Students create and tour a live performance and 
workshop for high school students and also create short videos segments to be used by high school teachers in 
health classrooms. Instructor: Khalsa or staff. One course. C-L: Global Health 216S, Theater Studies 279S
235SL. Capoeira: Practice and Culture. ALP, CCI, SS, W Lecture/lab course introducing the movement, 
music and culture of capoeira, an Afro-Brazilian martial art that combines dance, self-defense and acrobatics. 
Created by male African slaves in Brazil several hundred years ago, viewed as a social threat and outlawed in 
the 19th century, celebrated as an element of national identity in the 20th century, today capoeira is rapidly 
crossing national, racial and gender borders as it becomes a popular global practice. Studio classes twice a week 
focus on the basic movements, percussive music and call-and-response singing. Seminar once a week focuses 
on the historical, cultural and socio-political dynamics that shape capoeira in Brazil and beyond. Instructor: 
Wesolowski. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 221SL, African & African American Studies 221SL, 
Romance Studies 235SL
255. T’ai Chi and Chinese Thought. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 247; also C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 247
279SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene). ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
217SA; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 221SA, Music 217SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 217SA, 
Markets and Management Studies
284. Ritual, Performance, and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 284; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 284, Visual and Media Studies 285, International Comparative Studies 266
290. Special Topics Lecture. Content to be determined each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Special Topics in Dance Duke-Administered Study Abroad. Topics differ each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics Seminar. Content to be determined each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302S. Writing about Performance. ALP, CCI, R, W One course. C-L: see Writing 305S; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 283S, Music 305S
305T. Choreography. ALP, R Advanced study in dance composition designed to develop the student’s 
personal mode of expression. Prerequisites: Dance 105S, Dance 205T, and consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
306S. Dance for the Camera. ALP, R, STS The choreographic and bodily experience essential to dance for 
the camera. Hands on experience in videodance production through the exploration/production of several short 
individual and group videodance projects. Issues in creative and conceptual thinking, experimentation, pre/post 
video production, camera techniques, non-linear editing (Final Cut Pro), choreography for the camera. Viewings 
of seminal as well as experimental videodance works; discussions; readings; internet site visits; computer 
lab and dance studio/shooting location time; gallery/museum or video installation site visits. Prerequisite: 
Intermediate or above level of any dance technique, or Dance 105S. Instructor: Woods Valdes. One course. C-L: 
Documentary Studies 242S, Visual and Media Studies 345S
307SA. stARTup Project. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 316SA; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 315SA, Music 316SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 316SA, Markets and Management Studies
308. Performance and Technology: Composition Workshop. ALP, STS Workshop exploration of 
technologies embedded in performance: robots, media, computer interface. Students create performance 
projects and discuss theoretical and historical implications of technologies in performance. Open to dancers, 
actors, musicians, spoken word artists and all those interested in technology and the arts. No previous 
experience or programming skills required. Instructor: Brooke and DeFrantz. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 
364, Information Science + Studies 376, Electrical and Computer Engineering 364
309S. Dancing States of Mind: The Self, Social and Political Practice of Dance. ALP, R Practice-
based studio work, discussion, and readings in current political discourse, System Theory, contemporary 
philosophy and cultural theory. Reveals the culturally constructed nature of dance in Western society—its 
manner of production, dissemination and aesthetics—and examines the consequences of ‘the cultured flesh’ 



 Dance (DANCE)282

as a mode of propaganda. The cultivation of students’ radically subjective creativity, artistic experimentation, 
awareness, perception and expression, in order to understand and challenge the status quo; and to integrate 
abstract concepts into one’s own physical existence and redefine assumptions by moving right through 
them. Instructor: Kliën. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 309S, Cultural Anthropology 311S, International 
Comparative Studies 309S
315S. History of Modern Dance, 1880-1950. ALP, CCI Modern dance as an art of individuals who 
created new dance styles that challenged established systems of culture and pushed the boundaries of good 
taste. Reflection and commentary on contemporary mores and events, international influences from France, 
new anthropological studies, German expressionism and the religions of Asia, Native Americans and African 
Americans. The Americanization of theatrical dance in the bicultural environment of the United States during 
the 1930s and ‘40s. Instructor: Dickinson or Shah. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 315S
316S. Postmodernism in Dance, 1950-2000. ALP, W An examination of American modern dance since 
the 1950s, which reinstructed what kinds of movements were considered “dance” and what kind of dance was 
considered art. Postmodern dance as iconoclastic and inclusive, embracing performance art and film, theater 
and hip hop, fostering the rebirth of modern dance in Europe between 1970-90, and now re-absorbing and 
recycling the new forms it helped to create. Videos of dancing, guests, workshops, performances. Instructor: 
Shah. One course.
317. The Body in Art in Early Modern Europe: Power and Limits of Corporeal Representations. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 317; also C-L: Romance Studies 317, Theater Studies 245, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 217
318S. Movement in Question: Introduction to Critical Dance Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W This 
writing-intensive seminar casts students as a research team engaging in multiple ways with the interdisciplinary 
field of critical dance studies. Students read and analyze foundational texts and theories, develop capacity to 
interpretively analyze movement, and practically engage in embodied activities that make gaps between textual 
representation and embodiment visible. This holistic approach throws movement into question and centralizes 
dance as a critical way of making the social world. Final Research Projects include conventional academic papers 
or choreographed performances that engage issues raised in the course. Zero dance experience required. All 
physical abilities welcomed. Instructor: Wilbur. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 317S, Theater Studies 320S
335SL. West African Rootholds in Dance. ALP, CCI, CZ Lecture and dance laboratory exploring 
three West African traditional dance forms and their relationship to religious and social life in Africa and 
the Diaspora. Continuity and transformation of physical texts as cultural heritage, examined historically and 
aesthetically. Guest lecturers, videos, research project. Two lab sections, one for students with prior training 
in African Dance, and one for students with no experience. Instructor: A. Vinesett. One course. C-L: African & 
African American Studies 220SL, Religion 240SL
336. Black Dance. ALP, CCI, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 320
356. Dance and Dance Theater of Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ Asian dance and dance theater performance genres 
and the cultural aesthetics that inform them. Cultural traditions of China, Korean, Japan, India, Indonesia, 
Thailand and Cambodia. Religious, ritual, folk and royal court forms of artistic performance. The mythology, 
legends and symbolic interpretations that underlie the thematic core of these performance traditions; spiritual 
importance of disciplined training; the intercultural translation and adaptation of Asian performance disciplines 
to the West. Instructor: Shah. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 233, Religion 241, Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 246, International Comparative Studies 243
357L. Kundalini Yoga and Sikh Dharma. ALP, CCI, CZ Introduction to Kundalini Yoga and meditation 
and yogic lifestyle as taught by Yogi Bhajan through practice, lecture, writing and discussion. Overview of 
the basic philosophy of Sikh Dharma and the development of Sikhism and Kundalini Yoga in the Western 
Hemisphere. Instructor: Khalsa. One course. C-L: Religion 242
365L. The Art and Cultural History of Flamenco. ALP, CCI, CZ A lecture and dance laboratory course 
that examines the history of Flamenco, a dance and music form of southern Spain forged by a remarkable 
intercultural exchange among Arabic, Judaic, and Iberian cultures, inhabitants of Spain, and subsequently 
enriched by rhythms and influences from the East Indian gypsies and from Latin America. Examination of the 
three elements of flamenco: cante (song); baile (dance); and toque (guitar). Flamenco’s place in the cultural life 



Dance (DANCE) 283

of Spain and its evolution to contemporary forms. Lab component introduces students to the complex footwork, 
rhythms, and physical style of flamenco. Taught in English. Instructor: Santana. One course. C-L: Spanish 364
367. Dance and Religion in Asia and Africa. ALP, CCI, CZ Dance and dance-theatre forms in relation to 
religious beliefs, concepts, and mystic practices within Asian and African cultures. How religion shapes the way 
the body is perceived, and how spiritual power and energy is symbolically transmitted to the dancer through 
religious practices. Impact of colonialism and globalization on traditional religious performances. Instructors: 
Shah and Vinesett. One course. C-L: Religion 244, African & African American Studies 222, International 
Comparative Studies 214
368. Gender in Dance and Theatre. ALP, CCI, CZ Ways in which gender and sexuality are conceptualized 
in selected performance cultures. Interprets these historically constituted social formations through an 
examination of the diverse cultural constructions of gender meanings, representations and ideologies as 
interpreted and expressed in dance and theatre. Symbolic meanings of gender in relation to forms of social life 
and theatrical experience. The Devadasi in India, the concept of the male embodied Onnagata, and the notion 
of the female embodied Otokoyaku in the dance-theatre of Japan. Instructor: Shah. One course. C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 212, Theater Studies 236, International Comparative Studies 215, Study of 
Sexualities
370S. The Choreographic Mind: Order, Disorder, Organization, Relations. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R Practice-based studio work, discussions, and readings in current cultural theory, contemporary philosophy, 
and political discourse. Introduces choreography as a creative act of structuring movement; interrogates 
culturally dominant as well as subversive modes of ordering; examines the wider social and political context 
and consequences of various forms of artificially created structures. The students’ radically subjective creativity, 
artistic experimentation, awareness, perception and expression is cultivated in order to understand and 
challenge the status quo and to create “relational artefacts” through choreographic craft. Instructor: Klien. One 
course. C-L: Visual Arts 371S
371. Artists in Healthcare: Collaborations and Complexities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R The economically 
over-burdened US health care system and extended life expectancies for older adults offer a unique opportunity 
for working artists—not arts therapists—to intervene in the rapidly expanding field of integrative art and 
health. Rather than study health outcomes as indicators of “success,” we centralize creative practice as our 
axis of inquiry. Course readings, interviews, and field visits to a Durham-based intervention highlight power 
imbalances and cultural sensitivities in hospitals, clinical care, assisted living, and nonprofit community care 
contexts. Culminates in student driven case studies of local arts work and workarounds. Instructor: Wilbur. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 374, Music 371, Theater Studies 371
375. Music for Dancers. ALP Exploration of the elements of music, music structures, and their relationship 
to movement and dance. Practical emphasis on rhythmic fundamentals, rhythm notation, musicality, mindful 
listening, and how they apply to choreography/composition and dance class. In-class movement, rhythm, and 
listening exercises, both solo and in groups, along with written and creative assignments, using drums, voice, 
body percussion and digital audio. The goal of this course is to provide musical training for dance/movement 
artists. Requirements: no musical training required to take the class, however, students should be able to create/
choreograph/improvise movement phrases. Instructor: Hanks. One course. C-L: Music 342
377S. Dance Science: An Evolutionary Approach. ALP, NS, R One course. C-L: see Evolutionary 
Anthropology 336S
379S. Legal Issues for the Performing Arts. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 311S; also C-L: 
Public Policy 363S, Economics 223S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 311S
390. Special Topics. Content to be determined each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390L. Special Topics. Content to be determined each semester. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics. Content to be determined each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual directed study in a field of special interest on a previously approved 
topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic or artistic product. Consent of 
instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Dance (DANCE)284

393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Dance 393. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
435. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
434; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 436
487S. Capstone Seminar: Research Methods in Dance Studies and Choreographic Performance. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W Methods used in dance theory, history, ethnography, education and choreography/
practice. Interviewing and documentation; examination of issues concerning participatory experience and 
objectivity in ethnographic research. Students develop a research paper that culminates in an extensive 
individual project completed in this course, or, in the case of dance majors, in Dance 489T. Open only to junior/
seniors. Recommended prerequisite: Dance 101, one additional course in dance history, theory, or world 
cultures of dance. Requires instructor consent. Instructor: Shah or Wilbur. One course.
489T. Capstone: Senior Project. ALP, R A research paper, choreographic project, or performance program 
with appropriate written documentation under dance faculty supervision. Open only to seniors earning a major 
in dance and with permission to seniors earning a minor in Dance. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Dance. Special Topics in Dance. Instructor: Staff. One course.
499S. Capstone Seminar: Distinction Project. ALP, R A substantial historical, analytical, empirical 
or theoretical paper of 30-50 pages in length, or a major choreographic or performance project with a written 
component of 15-25 pages in length that analyzes and elucidates the project’s conceptual, thematic and technical 
aspects. One course.
535S. AfroFuturism. ALP One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 620S; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 535S, Visual and Media Studies 524S
545S. Selected Topics in Dance Theory. ALP Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
561S. Art as Work: Valuing Labor in the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Interdisciplinary seminar on work, 
working identities, and workplace performances in the arts. Enrolled graduates and advanced undergraduates 
review theories of artistic production, labor, and value across the analytical traditions of cultural labor studies, 
critical race and feminist studies, dance and performance studies. Analysis of dominant representations of arts 
labor and entrepreneurship from arts management, administration and policy discourse. Our goal is to highlight 
institutional pressures that constrain enabling environments for the arts. Culminating research projects analyze 
and interpret local arts workworlds, including but necessarily students’ own. Instructor: Wilbur. One course. 
C-L: Literature 525S, Visual Arts 571S, Visual and Media Studies 571S
575S. Somatics: Embodiment for the Twenty-First Century. ALP, EI, NS, R Examines Somatics as 
emancipatory and ethical dance education designed to train reflective and autonomous dancers. The course is 
underscored by ethical principles foundational to somatic education, namely, acceptance, inclusivity, privacy, 
respect, and non-judgment. Somatic education is viewed as an intelligent movement-centered response 
to complex problems within the larger sphere of bio-politics, re-negotiating issues of control and fostering 
autonomy—of ourselves and of our environment. Classes will draw from the history of Somatics and its scientific 
and psychosocial underpinnings in forming a critique around current societal issues and its evolving impact on 
dance training. Instructor: Batson. One course.
590S. Topics in Dance/Embodiment. Subjects, areas, or themes embracing a range of approaches to 
embodiment in arts and humanities areas. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
645S. Black Performance Theory. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
621S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 621S
665S. Contemporary Dance History. ALP, CCI, CZ, W A survey course spanning twentieth- and twenty-
first-century developments in selected dance forms from around the world, including discussions of dance in 
its historical, political and cultural context. Readings will focus on dance as a social phenomenon; dance in the 



Dance (DANCE) 285

form of political activism; dance as a medium of projecting gendered identity and the historical trajectory of 
dance aesthetics. Discussions will also include postmodernism in dance and the impact of globalization on world 
dance forms. Invited guest artists. Instructor: Shah. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 509S, 
History 554S
690S. Special Topics in Dance. Special topics in dance. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major
Four pathways highlight the research trajectories of the Dance Program. None of the pathways targets a 

specific physical style or cultural tradition; rather, these traditions interweave through all the pathways.
These pathways are:
a. Dancing Cultures
b. Being and Healing
c. Process, Practice, and Research
d. Social Issues and Social Action
Please refer to the Dance Program website (https://danceprogram.duke.edu/) for the current descriptions 

and listing of courses under each of these pathways.
Major Requirements: To major in dance, a student must take a minimum of twelve course credits:
• Dance 101 (Introduction to Dance) 
• Four courses selected from one pathway
• One course each from the other three pathways
• Dance 487S  (Capstone Seminar: Research Methods and Writing in Dance Studies and Choreographic 

Performance)
• Dance 489T (Capstone: Senior Project) or Dance 499S (Capstone Seminar: Distinction Project)
• Equivalent of two course credits from partial or full-credit movement courses.
Fifteen hours total of service work are required of each student. This may be completed at any time during 

the four-year undergraduate experience.

Pathways
Courses listed below are suggested choices in the pathways.
• Dancing Cultures

• Dance 165 (Let’s Dance! Live Art and Performance)
• Dance 235SL (Capoeira: Practice and Culture)
• Dance 255 (T’ai Chi and Chinese Thought)
• Dance 316S (Postmodernism in Dance, 1950-2000)
• Dance 318S (Movement in Question: Introduction to Critical Dance Studies)
• Dance 336 (Black Dance)
• Dance 356 (Dance and Dance Theater of Asia)
• Dance 561S (Art as Work: Valuing Labor in the Arts)
• Dance 365L (The Art and Cultural History of Flamenco)
• Dance 590S (Topics in Dance/Embodiment)  
• Dance 535S (AfroFuturism)
• Dance 645S (Black Performance Theory)
• Dance 665S (Contemporary Dance History)
• Dance 690S (Special Topics in Dance)

• Being and Healing
• Dance 284 (Ritual, Performance, and Religion)
• Dance 377S (Dance Science: An Evolutionary Approach)
• Dance 390/390S (Special Topics)
• Dance 575S (Somatics: Embodiment for the Twenty-First Century)
• Dance 590 (Topics in Dance/Embodiment) 
• Dance 690S (Special Topics in Dance)

• Process, Practice, and Research
• Dance 105S (Dance Composition)

https://danceprogram.duke.edu/


 Dance (DANCE)286

• Dance 205S (Advanced Dance Composition)
• Dance 211 (Musical Theater Workshop: Performance)
• Dance 302S (Writing about Performance)
• Dance 308 (Performance and Technology: Composition Workshop)
• Dance 309S (Dancing States of Mind: The Self, Social and Political Practice of Dance)
• Dance 370S (The Choreographic Mind: Order, Disorder, Organization, Relations)
• Dance 375 (Music for Dancers)
• Dance 390/390S (Special Topics)
• Dance 412 (Performance: Modern)
• Dance 422 (Performance: Ballet)
• Dance 432 (Performance: African)
• Dance 442 (Performance: Jazz)
• Dance 443 (Performance: Tap)
• Dance 462 (Performance: Interdisciplinary)
• Dance 472 (Performance: Dance Theater)
• Dance 535S (AfroFuturism)
• Dance 590S (Topics in Dance/Embodiment) 
• Dance 690S (Special Topics in Dance)

• Social Issues and Social Action
• Dance 201S (Arts Entrepreneurship)
• Dance 207S (Performance and Social Change)
• Dance 379S (Legal Issues for the Performing Arts)
• Dance 390/390S (Special Topics)
• Dance 309S (Dancing States of Mind: The Self, Social and Political Practice of Dance)
• Dance 590 (Topics in Dance/Embodiment) 
• Dance 690S (Special Topics in Dance)

Courses originating outside of the Dance Program not listed here may be considered as satisfying pathways 
requirements at the discretion of the director of undergraduate studies and the student’s major advisor. No more 
than two courses originating outside of the Dance Program may count toward the pathways requirements.

The Minor
Requirements. To earn the minor in dance, students must complete the following requirements:
• Dance 101 (Introduction to Dance Pathways)
• Four full-credit courses
• One course credit made up of partial or full-credit course(s)
• Ten hours total of service work are required of each student. This may be completed at any time during 

the four-year undergraduate experience.

Documentary Studies
Lecturing Fellow Sims, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The goal of this interdisciplinary program is to introduce, broaden, and enhance the technical skills and the 

theoretical and ethical awareness of students who specialize in one or more of the following modes of community-
based fieldwork: photography, oral history, audio, filmmaking, folklore, and ethnographic writing. Courses in this 
area are offered through the Center for Documentary Studies, and the departments of African and African American 
studies, art, cultural anthropology, arts of the moving image, history, and public policy studies. The Center for 
Documentary Studies also houses a number of documentary projects that address issues of literacy, collaborative 
photography, oral history, and farm worker advocacy that students will be exposed to through their affiliation 
with this program. A major goal of this program is to connect student experience and creativity to community life. 
Documentary studies courses teach an arts-and-humanities-based fieldwork research methodology.

Achievement of the program’s goal is facilitated by an integrated curriculum of required and elective courses 
that allow students to specialize in one or more areas of documentary work, and to complete a major documentary 



Documentary Studies (DOCST) 287

project under the guidance of participating faculty members. An active advisory procedure assists students in 
planning fieldwork projects and other learning opportunities. A certificate is available for students who complete 
program requirements. Participation in documentary studies courses, with the exception of the capstone course, 
is available to all undergraduates whether or not they seek the certificate.

The certificate in documentary studies is awarded to students who successfully complete six courses 
approved as part of the documentary studies program. These include a required survey course titled Traditions 
in Documentary Studies, four related courses from the approved courses (including electives) listed in this 
undergraduate bulletin, and a required capstone course, Seminar in Documentary Studies. During the seminar, 
students are expected to bring to completion one major documentary project (using audio, video, photos, and/or 
ethnographic writing methods) and to present this project to an audience outside the classroom by the semester’s 
end. The Seminar in Documentary Studies is designed as the culminating experience of the certificate program 
and is therefore open only to students enrolled in the program. Electives chosen by the student under the guidance 
of the program director should facilitate the completion of the final project.

Courses in Documentary Studies (DOCST)
80S. Studies in Special Topics. Opportunities for first-year students to engage with a specific issue in 
documentary studies, with emphasis on student writing. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
89S. First Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Traditions in Documentary Studies. ALP, CCI Traditions of documentary work seen through an 
interdisciplinary perspective, with an emphasis on twentieth-century practice. Introduces students to a range of 
documentary idioms and voices, including the work of photographers, filmmakers, oral historians, folklorists, 
musicologists, radio documentarians, and writers. Stresses aesthetic, scholarly, and ethical considerations 
involved in representing other people and cultures. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
103, International Comparative Studies 111
105S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach. ALP, R, SS A documentary approach to 
the study of local communities through video production projects assigned by the course instructor. Working 
closely with these groups, students explore issues or topics of concern to the community. Students complete an 
edited video as their final project. Not open to students who have taken this course as Film/Video/Digital 105S. 
Instructor: Hawkins. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 106S, History 125S, Political Science 105S, Public 
Policy 170S, Visual and Media Studies 106S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
107. History of Documentary Film. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 265
107A. History of Documentary Film. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 265A
110S. Introduction to Oral History. CZ, R Introductory oral history fieldwork seminar. Oral history 
theory and methodology, including debates within the discipline. Components and problems of oral history 
interviewing as well as different kinds of oral history writing. Instructor: Lanier. One course. C-L: History 126S
115S. Introduction to Black and White Photography. ALP Foundation class in photography utilizing 
black and white film and a wet darkroom. Shoot, process, and print individual student work throughout the 
semester. Emphasis on the documentary approach and a continual visual exploration of meaning and metaphor 
in the form of regular assignments, slide lectures of important historic and contemporary photographic work, 
and critiques of each other’s work. No textbooks are required, though students will need to budget a comparable 
amount for supplies and equipment. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Sharp. One course. C-L: Visual 
Arts 115S, Visual and Media Studies 115S
119S. Introduction to Digital Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 119S
135S. Introduction to Audio Documentary. ALP, R Recording techniques and audio mixing on digital 
editing software for the production of audio (radio) documentaries. Various approaches to audio documentary 
work, from the journalistic to the personal; use of fieldwork to explore cultural differences. Stories told through 
audio, using National Public Radio-style form, focusing on a particular social concern such as war and peace, 
death and dying, civil rights. Instructor: Biewen. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 135S, 
Information Science + Studies
153FS. Borderline Humans: How Walls (and Bridges) Define Us. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Examines the 



 Documentary Studies (DOCST)288

border/frontera as national metaphor: a scar on land and bodies, a wall between friends, a line of demarcation 
for enemies, a nightmare for policy-makers, a delineation for human rights abuses, a law enforcement 
nightmare, a pass-through for trade and NAFTA, a catchall for the poor, a diversion for traffickers. Study 
history, culture, policy, creative writing and art addressing the only line between two nations with such disparity 
in wealth. Look at immigration as it relates to labor, particularly farmworkers and their work in US fields. 
Students will engage in a research project related to the instructor’s Bass Connections Project entitled: America’s 
Sacred Spaces. Instructor: Thompson. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 153FS, Cultural 
Anthropology 153FS
159S. Gateway Seminar: What Did Your Grandparents Do? A Global Exploration of Individual 
Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 159S
171SA. Capturing the City: Documentary Photography in Berlin. ALP, CCI History and development 
of documentary photography in Germany since the 19th century. Photography fieldwork projects focused on 
interpreting cultural life, public spaces, landscapes, and people in Berlin. Includes techniques and practice 
of color photography—composition, lighting, color correction, editing, and sequencing. Engagement with 
contemporary photography scene in Berlin through visits with area artists, museum visits, and mounting of 
exhibition of student work. Offered through the Duke in Berlin program. Instructor: Sims. One course. C-L: 
German 222SA, Visual Arts 171SA, Visual and Media Studies 171SA
190S. Special Topics. Special topics in Documentary Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
202S. Children and the Experience of Illness. ALP, SS An exploration of how children cope with illness, 
incorporating the tools of documentary photography and writing. Students will work outside class with children 
who are ill and teach them how to use a camera, working toward an exhibit of photographs at the end of the 
semester. Permission required. Required participation in service-learning. Instructor: Moses. One course. C-L: 
Public Policy 395S, Visual and Media Studies 211S, Child Policy Research
204FS. Documenting the Middle East: Community and Oral History. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 204FS; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 204FS, Human Rights
206S. Medicine and the Vision of Documentary Photography. ALP The intersection of healthcare and 
documentary photography. Explore work of established photographers engaged with healthcare topics. Produce 
semester-long documentary photography project and 5-10 page documentary essay on healthcare related topic. 
Students must have or quickly develop proficiency in the use of a digital SLR camera and Adobe Lightroom. 
Course materials include photographs, articles, and books. Class sessions combine critique of student work, 
discussion of course materials, and discussion of ethical questions involved in documentary representation of 
healthcare-related topics. Instructor: Moses. One course. C-L: Public Policy 377S, Visual and Media Studies 
204S, Visual Arts 204S
208S. The Silent Film: An Introduction. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 208S
209FS. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, 
EI Documentary photography as a tool for exploring public education in Durham. Learn digital techniques 
including camera function, Photoshop, ink-jet printing, audio capture and production of audio-visual slide 
shows. Discuss ethical issues that emerge as a result of digital photographic impermanence. Service-learning 
environment consisting of fieldwork photography in collaboration with community organization, culminating 
in an exhibit. This is a Focus Program Course for Knowledge in the Service of Society. Department consent is 
required. Instructor: Post-Rust. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 212FS, Visual and Media Studies 212FS, Education 
209FS
209S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, 
EI Documentary photography as a tool for exploring public education in Durham. Learn digital techniques 
including camera function, Photoshop, ink-jet printing, audio capture and production of audio-visual slide 
shows. Discuss ethical issues that emerge as a result of digital photographic impermanence. Service-learning 
environment consisting of fieldwork photography in collaboration with community organization, culminating in 
an exhibit. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Post-Rust. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 212S, Visual and 
Media Studies 212S, Education 209S, Information Science + Studies
215S. Documentary Photography and the Southern Culture Landscape. ALP, CCI Emphasis on 



Documentary Studies (DOCST) 289

the tradition and practice of documentary photography as a way of seeing and interpreting cultural life. The 
techniques of color and black-and-white photography—exposure, development, and printing—diverse ways 
of representing the cultural landscape of the region through photographic imagery. The role issues such as 
objectivity, clarity, politics, memory, autobiography, and local culture play in the making and dissemination of 
photographs. Instructor: Rankin. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 216S, Visual and Media Studies 215S
222S. The Photographic Portfolio. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 222S
223S. Global Stories, Local Issues. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 223S; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 260S
224S. Children’s Self Expression: Literacy Through Photography. ALP, EI, SS Children’s self-
expression and education through writing, photography and documentary work. Focus on reading and critical 
interpretation of images. The history, philosophy, and methodology of Literacy Through Photography. Includes 
internship in an elementary or middle school classroom. Required participation in service-learning. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Hyde. One course. C-L: Education 244S, Visual and Media Studies 207S
227S. Sociology through Photography. ALP, SS Documentary photography used as a tool to see the 
world through a sociological lens. Photographs and the social construction of reality; generic components of 
social organization (codes of conduct, mechanisms of social control); power relations and social inequalities; 
and social identities (how they’re formed in relation to structures, experiences, history and culture). Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Hyde. One course. C-L: Sociology 352S, Visual and Media Studies 218S
230S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations. ALP, CCI, R Theory and practice of documentary 
photography in a small-town context. Students working in collaboration with one nearby small town complete 
a documentary photographic study of one individual or group within that town. Includes analysis of the 
documentary tradition, particularly as it relates to locally situated work and to selected individual projects; 
building visual narrative, developing honest relationships with subjects, responsibility to subjects and their 
communities, and engaging with and portraying a community as an outsider. Photo elicitation and editing 
techniques. Consent of instructor required. Required participation in service-learning. Instructor: Post-Rust. 
One course. C-L: Visual Arts 232S, Public Policy 389S, Visual and Media Studies 224S, Policy Journalism and 
Media
236S. Color Photography: Fieldwork and Digital Color. ALP Field-based course examining color 
photography as a documentary tool. Students learn about aesthetic and technical foundations of color 
photography using recent digital technology. Class-conducted intensive examination of the work of historic and 
contemporary color documentary photographers. Advanced techniques in film scanning, Photoshop, and color 
pigment printing using Arts Warehouse multimedia classroom. Completion of semester-long color photographic 
project, and final project consisting of production of a series of color pigment prints. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Harris. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 240S, Visual and Media Studies 227S
242S. Dance for the Camera. ALP, R, STS One course. C-L: see Dance 306S; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 345S
245S. Photography in Context. ALP, R Uses the Duke Library Photography Archive as a resource to 
challenge students to think critically about photography. Considers how photography offers insights into areas 
of academic study such as social change, sexual identity, and regional culture, and how images have shaped 
collective understanding of these issues. Focuses on analyzing and contextualizing bodies of photographic 
work, the historical moment in which the pictures were made, personal history and artistic sensibility of the 
photographer, tools of the medium, along with considering personal responses to images and the ways in which 
all factors come together. Instructor: Sartor. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 254S, Visual and Media Studies 252S, 
International Comparative Studies 245S
246S. Feeding Diaspora: Global Food Stories and Audio Journalism. CCI, CZ Audio production-
based course. Learn histories of global diaspora and their relationship to food and culture. Understand social, 
political and economic factors that shape global food production. Develop journalistic and storytelling skills 
including interview techniques, interpersonal and cross-cultural engagement with subjects, journalistic 
research, and narrative construction. Critical engagement with ethical considerations of representation central 
to journalism in a cross-cultural, diasporic context. Build audio-production skills including recording techniques 
and editing software. Produce broadcast-quality, full-length audio journalism piece on a global food story of 



 Documentary Studies (DOCST)290

student’s choosing. Instructor: Diaz. One course.
248S. Environmental Conservation and Documentary Photography. ALP, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Environment 222S; also C-L: Marine Science and Conservation, Human Rights
250S. The Photobook: History and Practice. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 249S
264. Introduction to Film Studies. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 289; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 278, English 181, Literature 110, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
268. Religion and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 268; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 269, Ethics Elective
270. Contemporary Documentary Film: Filmmakers and the Full Frame Documentary Film 
Festival. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 264; also C-L: Political Science 276, 
Public Policy 374, Arts & Sciences IDEAS themes and University Course 206
271S. Public Policy Video. ALP, CCI, SS Documentary film course focusing on the production of advocacy 
videos for social change. Covers methods and traditions of community organizing, introduces knowledge and 
skill sets needed to make effective videos for grassroots organizations, and explores how video is integrated into 
organizing strategies to achieve better results. Includes instructor-supervised fieldwork with community partner 
organization; student groups will research, write, direct, and produce a class video for a campaign to improve 
educational and economic opportunities in Durham’s low-income communities. Instructor: Orenstein. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 375S, Visual and Media Studies 377S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 271S, Human Rights
272S. Documentary and Policy: How Documentary Influences Policy. ALP Examines documentaries 
as catalysts for change in local, state, and federal laws and regulations, with special attention to relationships 
between film and organizations with political influence. Looks at how documentaries have altered public 
sentiment and political outcomes. Uses case studies of documentary films (essay-style, journalistic, information-
driven films; narrative, story-driven films; propaganda; art films; and hybrids of all of the above). Explores the 
question of how a film achieves influence: for example, with a high-profile theatrical and/or television release, 
by utilization as an educational tool, or by ‘going viral’ to become part of a public conversation. Instructor: Price. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 386S, Public Policy 228S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 272S
274. The Middle East Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
273; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 218, Political Science 273
275S. The Documentary Essay: Exploration, Research, and the Peripatetic Tradition in 
Documentary Writing. ALP, R, W Writing workshop course exploring the intersection of documentary 
fieldwork methods and the exploratory traditions and practices of the essay. Grounded in the recognition that 
the documentary essay engages the world first, seeking knowledge and understanding, gathers the material of 
art by direct experience, and turns more outward than inward. Out-of-class exploration emphasized: on foot 
in the tradition of the flâneur; through careful exploration of the special collections of Duke University; and by 
pursuing a common subject as a class. Wide readings in documentary essays, workshop discussion of student 
work, and the eventual goal of publication in the new CDS student documentary magazine. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: English 213S
276S. Writing American Politics. CZ, EI, R, SS, W Reading and writing intensive seminar focused on 
documentary works that document and discuss US politics and political movements. Engage and analyze 
historical and contemporary documentary media on the Populist movement, the long civil rights movement, the 
modern women’s movement, Black Lives Matter, Moral Mondays, and other social movements, as well as US 
elections and significant figures in US politics. Emphasis on 20th century. Course materials include historical 
writings, journalism, memoir, fiction, music, and film. Guided research on a US political phenomenon resulting 
in a 20-page final paper. Instructor: Tyson. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 233S, History 
360S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 226S
278S. Producing Docu-Fiction. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 340S
279S. Docu-Poetry: Real Life Truths Outside and Inside the Poetic Narrative. ALP, EI, 
W Investigates written and oral poetry as a mode of documentary storytelling. Engage with contemporary and 
historical poetry examining real-life, historical events. Investigate relationship between history, documentary, 



Documentary Studies (DOCST) 291

and poetry. Write poems based on research with multiple forms of archival source material and critical 
interpretation thereof. Instructor: Green. One course. C-L: English 279S, Literature 279S
281S. Cinematography. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 248S
282AS. Studies in the United States Culture Industries. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see Visual and 
Media Studies 279AS; also C-L: Public Policy 293AS
285S. Visiting Filmmaker Master Courses: Special Topics. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 379S; also C-L: Visual Arts 325S
288S. Editing for Film and Video. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 356S
290. Special Topics in Documentary Studies. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or area in lecture 
format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Special Topics in Documentary Studies: Study Abroad. Documentary Studies course taught in 
Duke-administered study abroad programs. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Documentary Studies. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or area in seminar 
format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295S. Arts Entrepreneurship. One course. C-L: see Music 295S; also C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
295S, Dance 201S, Visual and Media Studies 295S, Theater Studies 312S, Visual Arts 295S
303. History of Photography, 1839 to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 303; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 352
310S. The Short Audio Documentary. ALP, R Introductory to intermediate public radio-style audio 
documentary production. Includes instructor-supervised fieldwork with an audio recorder in a variety of settings 
using creative approaches; students produce four short pieces (3-4 minutes long) in varying styles (journalistic, 
narrative, artistic) for posting on class site and public websites. Instructor: Biewen. One course. C-L: Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies 310S, Information Science + Studies, Policy Journalism and Media
311S. Documentary Writing Workshop. ALP, R, W Workshop in the art and practice of writing in the 
long-form traditions of narrative nonfiction, literary journalism, and documentary writing. Write, share, and 
refine one major work of narrative nonfiction throughout the semester. Discuss research methods and resources, 
especially those useful for creative writers. Intended for advanced writers who would like to work on ambitious 
nonfiction work in an intensely creative and supportive workshop. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 
214S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies 311S
312S. Documentary Video Production Workshop. ALP Students research, write, direct, shoot, and 
edit independent documentary video projects and improve storytelling, videography, and lighting skills. Build 
upon prior knowledge of editing software and other technical aspects. Learn professionalization techniques for 
studio, freelance, or independent work, including: budgeting, cover letters, professional project proposals, client 
“pitch” skills. Class discussion and critique to build editing skills and storytelling sensibilities. Prerequisites: 
Documentary Studies 105 or Documentary Studies 271S or instructor consent. Instructor: Orenstein. One 
course. C-L: Visual Arts 312S, Visual and Media Studies 313S
315S. Environmental Issues & the Documentary Arts. ALP One course. C-L: see Environment 315S; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 309S
316S. Activating the Archive: Archival Research as Documentary Practice. ALP, EI, R Introduces 
methods of archival research and investigates its use as a tool for activism within documentary practice. Uses 
Duke’s Rubenstein Rare Book and Manuscript library to gain practical experience to effectively locate, retrieve, 
handle, document and analyze primary source materials. Students produce original written and multimedia 
documentary projects that rethink notions of history, identity, memory, and loss. Explores individual and open 
source archives, as well as works by contemporary artists and documentarians who mediate archival materials 
and structures. Emphasizes the archive as a site of discovery and construction. Instructor: McCarty. One course. 
C-L: Visual Arts 316S, Visual and Media Studies 314S
317S. Veterans Oral History Project. CCI, SS Explore methods of oral history, specifically focusing on 
interviewing U.S. military veterans who have served during times of conflict. Weekly readings concerning ethics 
of oral history work and the particulars of interviewing veterans. Learn techniques for conducting successful 



 Documentary Studies (DOCST)292

oral history interviews and master technical skills involving recording equipment. Conduct multiple interviews 
with veterans throughout semester. Discuss interviews and transcriptions with classmates. Assignments include 
written responses and a final presentation on conducted interviews. Includes a service-learning component 
involving work in the community. Instructor: Lanier. One course. C-L: History 381S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 317S, Human Rights
318S. Photo Workshop. ALP Examines historical and contemporary photographic artists for whom a 
particular photographic technique is essential to the creation of their work. Investigates strategies of intentional 
lighting. Explores techniques most suited to the documentation of individual student’s chosen subject matter 
and create a cohesive body of work by semester’s end employing that strategy. May use digital or analog 
equipment. No textbooks are required, though students will need to budget a comparable amount for supplies. 
Not open to students who have taken DOCST 217S/ARTSVIS 218S. Instructor consent required. Prerequisite 
(any one of): DOCST 115S, 119S; ARTSVIS 115S, 119S; VMS 115S. Instructor: Sharp. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 
318S, Visual and Media Studies 333S
320S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom 
Struggle. ALP, CCI, CZ Documentary writing course exploring the African American Freedom Struggle in the 
United States from the Civil War era to the present. Focus on the American South and black social movements 
from World War II until 1980. Students engage wide ranging archival material including documentary research, 
traditional historiography, interviews, memoirs, fiction, poetry, music and film. Students write weekly essays 
and a final documentary history project on a topic of their choosing. Instructor: Tyson. One course. C-L: African 
& African American Studies 231S, History 356S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 320S, 
Human Rights
321S. Refugee Lives: Violence, Culture and Identity. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 320S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 321S, Human 
Rights
322S. American Independent Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 318S; also C-L: English 
389S, Theater Studies 373S, Visual and Media Studies 332S
323S. Motion Graphics for Film and Video. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 322S
326. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ Focus on present-day and historical documentary 
traditions in American South, with an emphasis on call and response between black and white cultures. The 
arts and humanities as embedded in particular histories and cultures found in the South, and as performed 
in music and theater; and portrayed in documentary films, civil rights photography, Southern literature, and 
historical and autobiographical writing. Includes historical texts, oral histories and testimonies of living persons, 
along with documentary films, photographs, and writings from people in Durham and elsewhere in the region. 
Instructor: Tyson. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 230, History 358, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 326, Human Rights
326S. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ Seminar with focus on present-day and historical 
documentary traditions in American South, with an emphasis on call and response between black and white 
cultures. The arts and humanities as embedded in particular histories and cultures found in the South, and 
as performed in music and theater; and portrayed in documentary films, civil rights photography, Southern 
literature, and historical and autobiographical writing. Includes historical texts, oral histories and testimonies of 
living persons, along with documentary films, photographs, and writings from people in Durham and elsewhere 
in the region. Instructor: Tyson. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 230S, History 358S
327S. Migrations. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Climate refugees, exiles of war, economic migrants, expatriates 
seeking new opportunities, along with others compelled to flee their current circumstances and look for a 
new life, are moving across borders. Combine these movers with the billions of religious pilgrims, adventure 
travelers, and tourists, and we find a movement of humanity en masse in greater numbers than ever in the 
history of humanity. Combining literature on pilgrimage with travel memoirs and essays on travel, films on 
the act of walking, and multimedia explorations of refugee journeys, immigrant life, and border crossings, this 
course seeks to make sense of our unprecedented era of migration. Instructor: Thompson. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 327S
329S. Historical Documentary Production. ALP, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 



Documentary Studies (DOCST) 293

Studies 429S
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Focus 
on those who bring food to our tables, particularly those who labor in the fields of North Carolina and the 
Southeast. Students will learn about farm work from the plantation system and slavery to sharecropping and 
up to the migrant and seasonal farmworker population today. Study and analysis of media representations 
of farmworkers and agricultural issues as well as historical and contemporary documentary work and its 
contributions to farmworker advocacy. Includes a service-learning component involving work in the community. 
Instructor: Thompson or Sims. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 236S, Visual and Media Studies 341S, 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 332S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 332S, 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South, Human Rights
336S. Unraveling Paradise: Examining the Mythical Ideal Through Art and Documentary of the 
Caribbean. ALP, CCI, CZ The concept of the Caribbean as “paradise” is central to Western conceptions of the 
Caribbean. This course looks at the origins of the paradise myth throughout the Caribbean at large with special 
emphasis on the Bahamas. Examines the paradise myth as present through a variety of artistic and documentary 
media forms, including texts, film, photographs, fine art, poetry, music, and performance. Explores why and 
how Caribbean paradise myth was created and the ways in which it is perpetrated, and its effects on Caribbean 
culture, society, and self-understanding in present day. Looks at how present-day art and documentary are 
working to counter the long-standing paradise-myth narrative. Instructor: Galanis. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 
336S, Visual and Media Studies 367S, Latin American Studies 336S
337S. Articles of Truth: Creating Culture through Multimedia. ALP, CCI Engage the work of 
historical and contemporary media creators who played an influential role in shaping cultural, social, 
and political movements. Learn tools and strategies used by media producers and apply them to students 
own documentary and artistic work. Examine and discuss ethical issues that arise for documentary media 
producers with political and social goals and commitments. Respond to current events through individualized 
multidisciplinary practices including writing, song, photography, film, and new media. Emphasis on punk, rock, 
hip-hop, and activist movements. Instructor: Road. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 337S, Visual and Media Studies 
372S
338S. Media and Indigenous Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ This course examines the relationship between 
media and Indigenous Peoples in American history. Course content focuses on the following: First, critical 
analysis of representations of Indigenous Peoples, politics, issues, and cultures in historical and contemporary 
mainstream media, including television, Hollywood films, popular music, and news media. Second, the ways 
media has been used by Indigenous media producers as a social and political platform to engage the non-
Indigenous American public on Indigenous issues. Environmental issues and land rights issues play a large role 
in content of media examined in this course. Instructor: Dewey. One course.
341S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics. ALP, CCI, EI, R Explores the food 
system through fieldwork, study, and guest lectures that include farmers, nutritionists, sustainable agriculture 
advocates, rural organizers, and farmworker activists. Examines how food is produced, seeks to identify and 
understand its workers and working conditions in fields and factories, and, using documentary research 
conducted in the field and other means, unpacks the major current issues in the food justice arena globally 
and locally. Fieldwork required, but no advanced technological experience necessary. At least one group field 
trip, perhaps to a local farm or farmers market, required. Instructor: Thompson. One course. C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 238S, Public Policy 380S, International Comparative Studies 342S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 342S, Human Rights
344S. Our Culinary Cultures. ALP, CCI, W Documentary approach to the world of food using fieldwork 
research. Topics of food and its preparation examined through deep stories of how food is raised, prepared, and 
presented in order to explore how the myriad ways in which what we eat reveal key biographical, economic, 
religious, and other truths about our cultures. Introduces students to the history of food writing and the 
concept of food in general as a nonverbal tool of communication. Photography, audio, and documentary writing 
employed. Instructor: Alexander. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 258S, International Comparative 
Studies 344S
347S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Documentary 
fieldwork course exploring the legacy of civil and human rights activism in Durham through the life and work of 



 Documentary Studies (DOCST)294

noted historian, lawyer, poet, activist and priest Pauli Murray. Students will utilize scholarship, primary source 
archival materials and contemporary documentary projects to set a context for their fieldwork in Durham. 
Working with the instructor and local social change leadership engaged in work related to the “Face-Up Project,” 
students will deepen fieldwork skills—photography, writing, audio or filmmaking—and develop documentary 
projects in collaboration with culturally diverse community groups. Requires fieldtrips to communities in 
Durham. Instructor: Lau. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 246S, African & African American Studies 
236S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 246S, Human Rights
350S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ Interpretations of the black diaspora in 
documentary film from slavery to the present. Interdisciplinary study of black religions, cultures, histories, 
aesthetics, politics, and their representations, both globally and in the United States. Students will view and 
study a variety of films and approaches to film and study film’s evolution through numerous lenses from early 
ethnographic film to recent works by indigenous filmmakers, and understand the politics of representation, 
from D.W. Griffith to Spike Lee; read relevant works in the genres represented; and hear from guest critics, 
scholars of African and African American history and culture, and filmmakers. Instructor: Tyson. One course. 
C-L: African & African American Studies 225S, Visual and Media Studies 213S, Cultural Anthropology 262S, 
Public Policy 387S, International Comparative Studies 368S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 350S, Human Rights
352S. Documentary Publishing from Gutenberg to the Web: The Vanishing Point Course. 
ALP, CCI, R, SS, STS Publishing course leading to publication of Vanishing Point Magazine (http://
vanishingpointmag.com); grounded in cultural, technical, and aesthetic history of documentary periodicals, 
from 16th century Venetian avvisi through 18th century English gentlemen’s magazines through mid-20th 
century “Golden Age” of American magazines, to current age of digital documentary publication; speakers and 
advisors from publishing industry; wide readings in international history of periodicals and documentarism; 
production of Vanishing Point as conceived, created, edited, designed and built by students in accordance with 
professional standards and practices. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
352S, Visual and Media Studies 352S, Visual Arts 352S
353S. Sound for Film and Video. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 339S
354S. Web Design and Narrative: Artists, Documentarians, Art Historians, and Entrepreneurs. 
ALP, R Professional practices course for students in creative fields without a computer science background: 
for artists and documentarians to create robust web-based portfolios; for art historians to showcase curatorial 
and scholarly projects; for entrepreneurs to demonstrate ideas, concepts, and products to the public. Develop 
customized, individual websites using CMS platforms. Hone and workshop artistic/curatorial/product 
statements. Develop teaching philosophies, exhibition imagery, and video documentation of artistic, curatorial, 
or product talks. Publish a blog magazine on arts and innovation topics. Guest speakers visit the course on a 
regular basis to review the students’ work. Instructor: Sims. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 
354S, Visual and Media Studies 364S, Visual Arts 364S
356S. Magazine Journalism. SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 366S; also 
C-L: Public Policy 366S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies Core
357S. 16mm Film Production. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 356S
358S. Understanding Mediation. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Literature 325S; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 316S, English 480S, Theater Studies 249S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 325S
359A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey (Service-Learning). 
ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 359A; also C-L: Literature 230A, Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 359A
360S. Multimedia Documentary: Editing, Production, and Publication. ALP Edit and shape 
fieldwork material into a Web-based multimedia presentation, with a focus on video. Learn current technologies 
and techniques for multimedia publications. Examine unique storytelling strategies for on-line presentations 
and compare this medium to traditional venues for documentary work such as exhibitions, books, and 
broadcast. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 357S, Visual and Media Studies 348S, Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 242S
361S. Photographic Memory: Photo Albums, Photobooks, & Zines. ALP Examination of history 



Documentary Studies (DOCST) 295

and uses of photo albums, zines, and self-published photobooks as a means to memorialize and document 
underrepresented communities, cultural movements, customs, and personal experiences. Students view, handle, 
and analyze examples of all three formats from material in Rubenstein Rare Book & Manuscript library. Produce 
photo album, zine, and photo book using photographs and ephemera from personal archives. Interplay of text 
and image, methods for sequential storytelling, basic layout and design techniques, as well as methods for 
production distribution. Emphasis on photographic books as an accessible and democratic storytelling medium. 
Instructor: McCarty. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 361S, Visual and Media Studies 361S
362S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American 
South. CCI, EI, R, SS Immersion in the dangerous and contentious history of women’s activism in the 
American South. Explores methods for documenting and creating narratives of women’s social activism using 
oral history, archival research methods, and cultural production. Examines historical and contemporary 
women’s activism including: campaigns to end racial profiling and mass incarceration, preventing 
environmental destruction, improving public education, advocating for undocumented workers, creating safe 
spaces for GLBTQ youth, and championing reproductive justice. Final project (written or multimedia) consists 
of documentary exploration of one specific type of southern girls’ or women’s activism. Instructor: Hogan. One 
course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 306S, African & African American Studies 245S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 362S, Human Rights
363S. The Autobiographical Impulse in Photography. ALP, EI Study the autobiographical impulse in 
photography. Study and discuss methods of sequencing images and how these choices affect the photographic 
narrative. Interrogate subjective and ethical implications of the editorial process. Create autobiographical 
photographs and narratives. Study and discuss autobiographical narrative in the work of photography’s most 
renowned practitioners – From Alfred Stieglitz and Vivian Maier to Lee Friedlander and Carrie Mae Weems. 
Instructor: Harris. One course.
364S. Art of the Interview. R, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 364S; also C-L: 
Public Policy 364S
365S. The Documentary Turn: Southern Culture. ALP, CZ, EI, W Traces the convergence of 
traditional 20th c. documentary narrative (oral history, photography, film, and ethnography) with emergent 
21st c. technologies (digital platforms, crowd-sourced communications, viral information) that expand and 
test definitions of documentary practice. Course looks for unexpected outcomes and future possibilities 
at the intersections of analog and digital practice. Focus is on the cultures of the American South with an 
understanding of that region as mapped within a global imaginary. Requirements include experimental 
documentary project that combines storytelling (visual/literary), performance (theater/dance/music) or 
investigative research (oral/archival). Instructor: Hogan. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 365S
366S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History. ALP, CZ Course examines how 
artists, filmmakers, and journalists have used images to address complex human rights challenges in past and 
present. Engages complex ethical and legal questions that arise when documenting human rights issues, e.g., 
rights of people photographed, written about, or filmed, versus rights of photographers, writers, filmmakers. 
Learn historical and contemporary strategies for image makers to improve the society in which they live. Learn 
methods (visual, audio, writing) to document non-traditional political actors work in human rights fields. Apply 
knowledge and skills developed to address key issues in human rights policy in a thoughtful, clear way orally, 
visually, and written. Instructor: Hogan. One course. C-L: Public Policy 388S, History 398S, Visual Arts 366S, 
Visual and Media Studies 368S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 366S, Human Rights
367S. Video Journalism. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 365S; also 
C-L: Public Policy 365S, Visual and Media Studies 305S, Information Science + Studies, Policy Journalism and 
Media Studies
368S. The View Camera: Black and White Large Format Photography. ALP Advanced, production-
based photography course introduces students to the 4 x 5 large format view camera and its role in the 
documentary tradition. Learn to operate a view camera and attendant processes and materials to develop black 
and white sheet film and make silver gelatin contact prints from 4 x 5 negatives. Begins with focus on black 
and white negatives and contact prints. After demonstration of proficiency, students may optionally work in 
color film. Students produce a final portfolio of prints from their work throughout the semester. Class meetings 
consist of lectures, demonstrations, darkroom work, and critique of both process and final images. Instructor: 



 Documentary Studies (DOCST)296

Rankin. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 368S, Visual and Media Studies 373S
371. News as a Moral Battleground. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 371; also C-L: Public Policy 371, Study of Ethics 259, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 371, Human Rights
375S. Recycled Cinema. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 375S; also C-L: Literature 373S
440S. Black Frame: African American Documentary Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 410S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 410S
451S. Filming Art. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 451S
476S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics and Poetics of Knowledge Production. CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 476S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 411S, 
Literature 476S, Visual and Media Studies 476S, History 448S
480S. Capstone Seminar in Documentary Studies. ALP, R Immersion in fieldwork-based inquiry and 
in-depth projects that serve as Certificate in Documentary Studies capstone experiences for students. Methods 
of documentary fieldwork, including participant observation, and modes of arts and humanities interpretation 
through a variety of mediums (including papers, film, photography exhibits, radio pieces, and performances). 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: Documentary Studies 101 
and four Documentary Studies electives. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Special Topics in Documentary Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Documentary Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study in Documentary Studies. Supervision and guidance of individual, documentary 
production-based topics at an advanced level. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
492. Independent Study. Supervision and guidance of individual, documentary production-based topics at 
an advanced level. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Supervision and guidance of individual, research-based topics at an 
advanced level. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R Supervision and guidance of individual, research-based topics at an 
advanced level. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
511. Documentary and East Asian Cultures. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 511; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 513
540S. Memory and Documentary Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Romance 
Studies 540S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 540S, Literature 544S, Latin American Studies 540S
590. Special Topics in Documentary Studies. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or area in lecture 
format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Documentary Studies. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or area in seminar 
format. Open only to graduate students in the MFAEDA program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
620S. Film-philosophers/Film-makers. ALP, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 620S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 622S, Theater Studies 620S, English 620S
630. Projections in Time: The Still and Moving Image. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 629
640S. Expanded Cinema: Cinema Outside the Movie Theater. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and 
Media Studies 640S; also C-L: Literature 545S

Program Courses
African & African American Studies
207. African Americans Since the Civil War
531S. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images
539. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images



Decision Sciences (DECSCI)  297

Art History
539. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images
650S. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
341S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema
Bioethics and Science Policy
510S. Science and the Media: Narrative Writing about Science, Health and Policy
Cultural Anthropology
130. Anthropology and Film
131. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches
137. Music, Social Life, and Scenes
220FS. Global ‘Mixed Race’ Studies
220S. Global ‘Mixed Race’ Studies
243. Culture and Politics in Latin America
History
347. African Americans Since the Civil War
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
130. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
371. News as a Moral Battleground
International Comparative Studies
104. Anthropology and Film
325. Culture and Politics in Latin America
Jewish Studies
266S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema
Literature
230A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey (Service-Learning)
263S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema
Music
130. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches
137. Music, Social Life, and Scenes
Philosophy
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
Policy Journalism and Media Studies
371. News as a Moral Battleground
510S. Science and the Media: Narrative Writing about Science, Health and Policy
Political Science
272. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
Public Policy
231. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
371. News as a Moral Battleground
510S. Science and the Media: Narrative Writing about Science, Health and Policy
Religion
268. Religion and Film
Study of Ethics
259. News as a Moral Battleground
Visual Arts
206. Digital Imaging
Visual and Media Studies
130. Anthropology and Film
206. Digital Imaging
275S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema
359A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey (Service-Learning)
545. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images 
650S. Black Camera: Still and Moving Images

Duke Center for Interdisciplinary Decision Sciences
Courses in Decision Sciences (DECSCI) 
101. Fundamentals of Decision Science. SS This course is a question-driven introduction to the certificate 
and the fundamentals of how humans make decisions. The primary goal is to provide hands-on and problem-
focused instruction designed to connect students to research as quickly as possible. Substantive topics include 
behavioral and experimental economics, consumer behavior and marketing research, game theory, medical 
decision making, neuroeconomics, and political psychology. Instructor: de Marchi, Huettel. One course. C-L: 
Psychology 141



 Brain & Society (BRAINSOC) 298

201. Discovering Game Theory: Social Complexity and Strategic Interdependence. QS, SS One 
course. C-L: see Political Science 217; also C-L: Economics 362
401S. Research in Decision Science. QS, R This seminar allows students to engage in original research 
in the area of individual decision-making. As part of the Decision Science program, the emphasis is on 
interdisciplinary research combining insights from disciplines that include behavioral economics, game theory, 
machine learning, neuroscience, political psychology, and statistics. Work completed in this seminar can lead to 
either a stand-alone research project or honors in the student’s home major. Prerequisite: Decision Sciences 101. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.

Duke Institute for Brain Sciences
Courses in Brain & Society (BRAINSOC) 
390S. Bass Connections in Brain and Society: Special Topics. Bass Connections in Brain and Society: 
Special Topics; course content varies by semester. Enrollment requires prior acceptance into an associated 
Bass Connections in Brain and Society project team, which is managed separately by Bass Connections 
administration. Only students admitted into a project team will be given instructor consent for enrollment. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
395. Bass Connections in Brain and Society: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of 
undergraduate and graduate/professional students work with faculty to identify, explore and develop solutions 
to important, strategic issues where brain science impacts and is informed by society. Teams may also include 
postdoctoral fellows, visiting fellows and researchers, community partners, and other experts from business, 
government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel with or contribute to ongoing, faculty-
initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-based research, field work, and/or 
other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant 
analysis and interpretation. Enrollment requires prior acceptance into an associated Bass Connections in Brain 
and Society project team. Only students admitted into a project team will be given consent for enrollment. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
395-1. Bass Connections in Brain and Society: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. Teams of 
undergraduate and graduate/professional students work with faculty to identify, explore and develop solutions 
to important, strategic issues where brain science impacts and is informed by society. Teams may also include 
postdoctoral fellows, visiting fellows and researchers, community partners, and other experts from business, 
government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel with or contribute to ongoing, faculty-
initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-based research, field work, and/or 
other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant 
analysis and interpretation. Enrollment requires prior acceptance into an associated Bass Connections in Brain 
and Society project team. Only students admitted into a project team will be given consent for enrollment. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
396. Bass Connections in Brain and Society 2: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of 
undergraduate/graduate/professional students work with faculty in a second term to identify, explore, and 
develop solutions to strategic issues in brain science and society. Teams may also include fellows, community 
partners, and other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in 
parallel with or contribute to ongoing, faculty-initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, 
laboratory-based research, field work, and/or other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires 
substantive paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Enrollment requires prior 
acceptance into an associated Bass Connections in Brain and Society project team, which is managed separately 
by Bass Connections administration. Consent of the director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: 
Brain & Society 395. Instructor: Staff. One course.
396-1. Bass Connections in Brain and Society 2: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. Teams of 
undergraduate/graduate/professional students work with faculty in a second term to identify, explore and 
develop solutions to strategic issues in brain science and society. Teams may also include fellows, community 
partners, and other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel 



Brain & Society (BRAINSOC)  299

with or contribute to ongoing, faculty-initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-
based research, field work, and/or other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive 
paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Enrollment requires prior acceptance 
into an associated Bass Connections in Brain and Society project team, which is managed separately by Bass 
Connections administration. Only students admitted into a project team will be given consent for enrollment. 
Prerequisite: Brain & Society 395-1. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
397. Bass Connections in Brain and Society 3: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. Teams of 
undergraduate/graduate/professional students work with faculty in a third term to identify, explore and develop 
solutions to strategic issues in brain science and society. Teams may also include fellows, community partners, 
and other experts from business, government, and non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to ongoing, faculty-initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-based 
research, field work, and/or other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or 
product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Prerequisite: Brain & Society 395 and 396. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
397-1. Bass Connections in Brain and Society 3: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. Teams of 
undergraduate/graduate/professional students work with faculty in a third term to identify, explore and develop 
solutions to strategic issues in brain science and society. Teams may also include fellows, community partners, 
and other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to ongoing, faculty-initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-based 
research, field work, and/or other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or 
product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Prerequisite: any two of the following courses: Brain 
& Society 395, 395-1, 396, and 396-1. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
398. Bass Connections in Brain and Society 4: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. Teams of 
undergraduate/graduate/professional students work with faculty in a fourth term to identify, explore and 
develop solutions to strategic issues in brain science and society. Teams may also include fellows, community 
partners, and other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel 
with or contribute to ongoing, faculty-initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-
based research, field work, and/or other learning experience relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper 
or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Prerequisite: Brain & Society 395, 396, and 397. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
398-1. Bass Connections in Brain and Society 4: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. Teams of 
undergraduate/graduate/professional students work with faculty in a fourth term to identify, explore and 
develop solutions to strategic issues in brain science and society. Teams may include fellows, community 
partners, and experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. The work may run in parallel with 
or contribute to ongoing, faculty-initiated research. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, laboratory-
based research, field work, and/or other learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper 
or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Prerequisite: any three of the following courses: 
Brain & Society 395, 395-1, 396, 396-1, 397, and 397-1. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.

Ecology
For courses in ecology, see Biology (on page 209) and the Environmental Sciences and Policy Program 

(on page 356).

Earth and Ocean Sciences
Professor Klein, Chair; Professor Klein, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Lecturer Glass, Co-Director of Un-
dergraduate Studies; Professors Baker, Boudreau, Klein, McGlynn, Murray, Pratson, Shindell, and Vengosh; As-
sociate Professor of the Practice Johnson; Associate Professors Cassar and Li; Professors Emeriti Chameides, 
Haff, Heron, Perkins, Pilkey, and Schlesinger; Senior Lecturer Glass; Senior Research Scientist Dwyer

A major and a minor are available in this division.



 Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS) 300

The Division of Earth and Ocean Sciences offers introductory and advanced courses in climatology, coastal 
processes, environmental geology, hydrology, geochemistry, geomorphology, oceanography, paleontology, 
petrology, marine geology, and energy. A bachelor of science degree is offered for those students wishing to 
pursue further studies in the earth and ocean sciences, and for those who intend to work professionally in earth 
sciences. A bachelor of arts degree is offered for those students who wish to understand more fully local and 
global environmental issues. The majors are administered by the Nicholas School of the Environment. Additional 
information about the division can be found on the divisional website at https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/
undergraduate-programs/earth-ocean-sciences.

Courses in Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS) 
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. The Dynamic Earth. NS, STS Introduction to the dynamic processes that shape the Earth and the 
environment and their impact upon society. Volcanoes, earthquakes, seafloor spreading, floods, landslides, 
groundwater, seashores and geohazards. Emphasis on examining the lines of inductive and deductive reasoning, 
quantitative methods, modes of inquiry, and technological developments that lead to understanding the Earth’s 
dynamic systems. Instructors: Klein or Glass. One course.
102. The Dynamic Oceans. NS, STS The oceans and their impact on the Earth’s surface, climate, and 
society. Topics include seafloor evolution, marine hazards, ocean currents and climate, waves and beach erosion, 
tides, hurricanes/cyclones, marine life and ecosystems, and marine resources. Emphasis on the historical, 
society and economic roots of oceanography, the formulation and testing of hypotheses, quantitative assessment 
of data, and technological developments that lead to understanding of current and future societal issues 
involving the oceans. Instructor: Glass. One course. C-L: Biology 157, Marine Science and Conservation
201L. The Solid Earth: Minerals, Rocks, and Structural Geology. NS Description and interpretation of 
minerals, rocks and geologic structures. Lectures on theoretical aspects, lab on practical applications and use of 
petrographic microscope. Instructor consent required. Prerequisite: Earth and Ocean Sciences 101. Instructor: 
Boudreau. One course.
202. Atmosphere and Ocean Dynamics. NS, R Introduction to the dynamics of ocean and atmospheric 
circulations, with particular emphasis on the global climate cycle. Prerequisite: Mathematics 21 and 122, Physics 
141L or consent of instructor. Instructor: Li. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
203. The Surface of the Earth. NS Fundamental earth surface processes involving weathering, soils, 
hillslopes, rivers, wind, glaciers, and tectonic activity. Humans as agents of landscape change. The future of 
landscape. Prerequisite: Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 or 102. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Murray 
or Baker. One course.
204L. The Evolving Earth and Life. NS Evolution of the earth and life through time. Weekend field trip to 
Appalachian Mountains. Recommended: Earth and Ocean Sciences 101. Instructor: Glass. One course.
226S. Field Methods in Earth and Environmental Sciences. NS, R, W Introduction to basic field 
methods used in the earth and environmental sciences. Field investigations focus on topics such as groundwater 
and surface water movements, soil chemistry and identification, topographic and geologic mapping, the 
atmosphere/soil interface, and plant identification and distributions. Design of a field investigation, collection 
of data to address a specific goal, and interpretation and reporting of the results. Emphasis on learning to 
report field results in the format of scientific publications. Visits to five local field sites. Open only to juniors and 
seniors. Instructor: Klein or Dwyer. One course. C-L: Environment 226S
231. Energy and the Environment. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 231; also C-L: Energy 
231
239. Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry: From Air Pollution to Climate Change. NS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Environment 239
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 272A; also C-L: Environment 272A, 
Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
273LA. Biological Oceanography. NS, R One course. C-L: see Biology 369LA; also C-L: Environment 
369LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation

https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/undergraduate-programs/earth-ocean-sciences
https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/undergraduate-programs/earth-ocean-sciences


Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS)  301

280LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 280LA; also C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 384LA, Biology 279LA, Marine Sciences, 
Marine Science and Conservation
287A. Biodiversity of Alaska. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 287A; also C-L: Environment 277A
288A. Biogeography in an Australian Context. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 288A; also C-L: 
Environment 288A
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Earth and Ocean 
Sciences. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
315. Waves, Beaches, and Coastline Dynamics. NS, STS Oceanographic and geologic processes 
responsible for the evolution of nearshore features; fluid motions of many time scales in the nearshore 
environment, including waves and currents. Conceptual basis for models of how fluid motions interact with 
the shape of the beach and bed in the surf zone, giving rise to features such as beach cusps, bars, channels, 
and barrier islands. Various attempted engineering and coastal management solutions to the global retreat of 
shorelines. Instructor: Murray. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
316A. Beach and Island Geological Processes. Field seminar on the evolution of beaches and barrier 
islands with emphasis on the interactions between nearshore processes and human development. Prerequisite: 
Earth and Ocean Sciences 315/515 or consent of instructor. Also taught as Earth and Ocean Sciences 716A. 
Instructor: Murray. Half course.
322. Hydrologic and Environmental Data Analysis. NS, QS Focus on development of quantitative 
approaches used to interpret observations on hydrological and environmental processes across space and time, 
with application to case studies in water science. In this course, we will (1) generate knowledge of fundamental 
processes in aquatic ecosystems as they relate to contemporary issues, (2) apply data science skills to datasets 
in the water resources field, and (3) quantitatively explore a topic in aquatic science through an in-depth 
course project. Recommended prerequisite: prior experience with computational software (R preferred; Stata, 
MATLAB, and/or GIS acceptable). Instructor consent required. Instructor: Salk-Gundersen. One course. C-L: 
Environment 322, Civil and Environmental Engineering 365
323. Landscape Hydrology. NS Introduction to hydrology examining how rainfall and snowmelt become 
streamflow, groundwater and atmospheric water, with emphasis on hydrological processes inside watersheds. 
Topics include: the hydrologic cycle and water balances, evapotranspiration and snow energy balances, 
vadose zone hydrology, hydrogeology, hyporheic zones, riparian zones, streamflow generation mechanisms, 
biogeochemical budgets, and field measurement techniques. Linkages between physical hydrology and broader 
ecological and environmental sciences will be highlighted. Instructor: Salk-Gundersen. One course.
325. The Anthropocene: The Next Epoch of Geologic History. NS, STS Introduction to the next epoch 
of geologic history. The evolution of the technosphere, the global human-technological system that increasingly 
dominates biology, hydrology, and other major natural earth systems. The future of the earth and humanity. 
Instructor consent required. Prerequisite: Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 or 203. Instructor: Staff. One course.
341. Dinosaurs with Feathers and Whales with Legs: Major Evolutionary Transitions in the 
Fossil Record. NS, STS Focus on the fossil record of the differentiation of the major vertebrate groups. Study 
and critical evaluation of the paleontological and neontological evidence for four major macroevolutionary 
transitions in the history of life: fish to tetrapods, the reptile/mammal differentiation, the evolution of birds 
from dinosaurs, and the origin of whales. Stresses the importance of the fossil record in the reconstruction 
of transitions but also covers genetic, physiological, and developmental evidence gathered from living 
representatives. Prerequisite: Prior course work in Earth and Ocean Sciences or Biology or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Glass. One course. C-L: Biology 345
355. Global Warming. NS, STS Broad, interdisciplinary course on the observations, causes, and 
consequences of climate change. Course will cover modern and paleoclimate observations, human and natural 
drivers, and links between drivers and responses. Building on this physical science base, course will then analyze 
how socioeconomic choices affect future climate as well as the factors influencing those choices, including risk 
analyses, geoengineering proposals, climate metrics and the media. Instructor: Glass or Shindell. One course. 
C-L: Energy and the Environment



 Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS) 302

359. Fundamentals of GIS and Geospatial Analysis. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Environment 359
364S. Changing Oceans. NS, STS Our oceans are under severe stress. This seminar will explore human 
disturbances of marine environments, including ocean warming, sea level rise, melting of ice caps and sea ice, 
ocean acidification, coastal eutrophication, changes in primary production and food web dynamics, invasive 
species, overfishing, increased subsurface hypoxia, changes in circulation, stratification, and physical, chemical 
(e.g. oil spills) and noise pollution. Instructor: Cassar. One course. C-L: Environment 362S, Marine Science and 
Conservation, Energy and the Environment
364SA. Changing Oceans. NS, STS This seminar will explore the human disturbances of of marine 
environments, including ocean warming, sea level rise, melting of ice caps and sea ice, ocean acidification, 
coastal eutrophication, changes in primary production and food web dynamics, invasive species, overfishing, 
increased subsurface hypoxia, changes in circulation, stratification, and physical, chemical, and noise pollution. 
Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Cassar. One course. C-L: Environment 362SA
365. Introduction to Weather and Climate. NS Introduction to weather and climate. Topics include 
atmospheric structure, composition, circulation and energy properties; severe weather events such as cyclones, 
hurricanes, and tornadoes; ozone depletion; natural climate variability; climate change and global warming. 
Instructor: Li. One course.
370A. Physical Oceanography. NS, QS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 370A; also C-L: Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
374LA. Marine Ecology. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Biology 273LA; also C-L: Environment 273LA, 
Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates. NS, R One course. C-L: see Biology 377LA; also C-L: 
Environment 377LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
390. Special Topics in Earth and Ocean Sciences. Content to be determined each semester. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Earth and Ocean 
Sciences. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Earth and Ocean Sciences. Content to be determined each semester. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in Earth and Ocean Sciences. Content to be determined each semester. Consent 
of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
391. Independent Study. Directed reading or individual projects. Term paper required. Open only to 
qualified students by consent of director of undergraduate studies and supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
391A. Independent Study. Marine Lab version of EOS 391. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. See Earth and Ocean Sciences 391. Term paper required. Open to qualified 
students by consent of director of undergraduate studies and supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Marine Sciences
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified students by consent of director of 
undergraduate studies and supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
393-1. Research Independent Study. R See EOS 393. Open to qualified students with consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies. Half course. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
393A. Research Independent Study. R Marine Lab version of Earth and Ocean Sciences 393. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
394. Research Independent Study. R See Earth and Ocean Sciences 393. Open to qualified students by 
consent of director of undergraduate studies and supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 



Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS)  303

Marine Sciences
394A. Research Independent Study. R Marine lab version of Earth and Ocean Sciences 394. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
401. Field Exploration of the Geology of North Carolina. NS, STS Introduction to the geological history 
of North Carolina with an emphasis on active learning and field-based inquiry. Class time serves as preparation 
and background for two one-day and one overnight weekend field trips. An introductory geology background is 
useful but not required. Instructor: Glass. One course.
402S. Volcanology: Geology of Hawaii. NS, R Geology of volcanic processes and the benefits and hazards 
they present to society. Lectures, discussion and student presentations of independent research reports. 
Required field trip to Hawaii during spring break. Prerequisite: Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 recommended. 
Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Boudreau. One course.
403. Geology and Natural History of the Yellowstone Region. NS This course is a laboratory and 
field-trip based examination of the geological history of Yellowstone Country. We will look at the formation and 
deformational history of the Wyoming Thrust Belt, the volcanic history of the Absaroka Range, the dramatic 
activity and influence of the arrival of the Yellowstone Hotspot during the Pleistocene (and present day), the 
complex tectonic and world-famous glacial history of the Grand Tetons, and learn about the unique Eocene 
lacustrine and fluvial settings of the Wyoming Fossil Basin. Instructor: Glass. One course.
410S. Senior Capstone Experience. NS, R, STS Senior capstone field trip course. Field location varies. 
Topics in geology, hydrology, biology, climate, and other environmental subjects as appropriate for field area, 
especially human impact on the earth and the role of earth scientists as observers and teachers of earth-system 
change. Course content partially determined by students. Prerequisites: Open only to senior Earth and Ocean 
Sciences majors. Department consent required. Instructor: Dwyer. One course.
507S. The Amazon: Geology, Climate, Ecology, and Future Change. NS This course will study 
the natural history of the Amazon including its biodiversity, geological evolution, and modern climate and 
hydrology. The present development of the Amazon and best strategies for its future conservation will be 
discussed. Instructor: Baker. One course.
508. Climate History. NS Climate variation during the entire scope of Earth history. Coupling between 
climate evolution and biological evolution. Methods for reconstructing climate history. Implications of past 
climate change for future climate. Scientific and mathematical literacy assumed, but no specific prerequisites. 
Mid-term and final exams plus short term papers. Instructor: Baker. One course.
509S. Paleoclimate. NS, R Nature and mechanisms of climate variability throughout Earth history. Topics 
include general theory of climate, paleoclimate modeling and comparisons with observations, methodologies of 
reconstructing past climate variations, the observational record of paleoclimate extending from the Precambrian 
through the Ice Ages and Holocene to present, and the impact paleoclimate on biotic evolution/paleogeography 
and human cultural history. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Baker. One course.
510S. Paleoenvironmental Analysis. NS Methods of paleoenvironmental and paleoclimatic analysis. 
Includes radiometric and other methods of dating, stable isotopes, trace elements, paleobiotic and other 
methods of reconstructing climate, hydrology and environment of the past. Also includes approaches to 
modeling paleoenvironmental data. Instructor: Baker. One course.
511. The Climate System. NS, R Components of the climate system: observed climate change, concept 
of energy balance, basic circulation of the atmosphere and ocean, introduction to climate models, sample 
applications of climate models, interactions between the atmosphere/ocean/ and biosphere, land surface, 
cryosphere (snow and ice), and chemistry of the atmosphere. Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Instructor: Li. 
One course.
512. Climate Change and Climate Modeling. NS, R, STS Course aims to provide knowledge and 
understanding of physics of climate system and Earth system modeling for scientists, engineers and policy 
students with physics and mathematics background. Fundamental principles controlling physical and dynamic 
structure of climate system; discussion of relative roles of natural climate variability and external forces and 
anthropogenic influences. Explore numerical methods, develop computing skills, and deal with data handing 
as a means to an end of quantifying climate system behavior. Prerequisite: Earth and Ocean Sciences 511. 



 Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS) 304

Instructor: Li. One course.
513. Groundwater and the Environment. NS, STS An introduction to the principles of groundwater 
flow, development, and protection, with an emphasis on aquifer and groundwater evaluation and management. 
Topics include: baseflow analyses; stream-groundwater interactions; aquifer and vadose zone characterization; 
groundwater hydraulics and recharge; field hydrogeological data; groundwater modeling; water quality; and 
groundwater management. Open only to students who have taken at least one college-level natural science 
course (e.g., earth science, chemistry, physics, biology). Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 513
515. Mountain Ecohydrology Field Course - Montana. NS, R, STS Study of watershed ecohydrology 
and the interactions and feedback among hydrological and ecological processes in the western United States. 
Includes required pre-semester week-long field trip to Montana (with required fee), where participants visit 
active research watersheds, some of the most intensively instrumented ecohydrological research sites in the 
country. Students learn techniques to collect hydrologic and ecological field data and work with instructors to 
collect a comprehensive suite of ecohydrological data, to be interpreted and presented during series of follow-up 
class meetings. Prerequisite: General background in Earth and Environmental Sciences. Instructor: McGlynn.
520. Introduction to Fluid Dynamics. NS Conservation equations for mass, momentum and heat, with 
an emphasis on large temporal and spatial scales; application to the earth, ocean, and environmental sciences. 
Some background in differential equations highly recommended. Instructor: Staff. One course.
524. Water Quality Health. Explore basic concepts of water quality and human health with focus on the 
global water cycle, global water demand and availability, chemical properties of water, contaminants in water, 
health implications, and environmental isotope hydrology. Highlights relationships between human activities, 
water scarcity, water quality degradation, and ecological and health consequences. Addresses some policy 
implications related to conflicts over water resources and impact of energy production on water resources. 
Prerequisites: prior knowledge of introductory calculus and chemistry or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Vengosh. C-L: Environment 524, Global Health 534, Energy 524
525. Fundamentals of Water Biogeochemistry and Pollution. NS Course is designed to present 
students with a comprehensive introduction to the sources and impacts of pollution in marine and freshwater 
environments. Fundamental concepts and principles of aquatic biogeochemistry will first be introduced: marine 
and freshwater chemistry, primary production and food webs. Topics to be covered include biological (e.g. 
pathogens, invasive species), physical (e.g. thermal, plastics), and chemical (e.g. nutrient loading, oil, pesticides, 
metals) pollutants. Instructor: Cassar. One course.
526S. Water Forum Speaker Series. NS, STS Seminar including visiting scholars covering a broad array 
of issues on water including water quality, hydrogeology, biogeochemistry, water management, water treatment, 
ecology, water economy, and water policy and law at both the national and international levels. Instructor: 
Vengosh. One course.
527. International Water Resources. NS, SS, STS Overview of the hydrology, hydrogeology, water 
quality, and management of major international water resources. Focus on cross-boundary international rivers 
and aquifers, up-stream versus down-stream water users, the politics of water sharing and disputes, the role 
of science in water management, and prospects and implications for future utilization of contaminated rivers 
and stressed aquifers. Examples from international rivers such as the Tigris, Euphrates, Nile, Jordan, Colorado, 
Indus, Ganges, and Mekong and international aquifer systems such as the Mountain aquifer, Gaza Strip, Disi, 
and Nubian basins in northern Africa. Instructor: Vengosh. One course.
528S. Biological-Physical Couplings in Coastal Environments; Responses to Changing Forcing. 
NS, R Focus on select examples of biological-physical couplings that shape coastal environments (i.e. coastal 
“ecomorphodynamics”) and help determine how those environments respond to changing climate and land 
use. Environments include: barrier islands, tidal wetlands. Grading based on in-class presentations, and a final 
project (in the form of a research proposal). Instructor consent required. Instructor: Murray. One course.
530. Remote Sensing in Coastal Environments. NS, QS Introduction to the field of remote sensing 
and image processing with focus on applications to coastal monitoring and currently open research questions. 
Students will acquire an operational knowledge of various remote-sensing tools and data types, with emphasis 
on their application in coastal areas. Content will include theory, in-class laboratory exercises, and projects with 
environmental applications. Prerequisite: introductory or AP physics preferred or permission of instructor. 



Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS)  305

Instructor: Silvestri. One course. C-L: Environment 530, Civil and Environmental Engineering 574
540. Introduction to Modeling in the Earth Sciences. NS, QS Elementary methods for quantitatively 
modeling problems in the earth sciences. Formulation and solution of classical equations that express 
fundamental behaviors of fluids, sediments, and rocks. Examples from different fields of geology. Simple 
modeling exercises, including a final project. Instructors: Staff. One course.
542S. New Perspectives and Methods in Surface Process Studies. NS Nonlinear dynamics and related 
approaches to understanding, modeling, and analyzing physical systems, with emphasis on applications in 
geomorphology. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Murray. One course.
550. Climate and Society. EI, NS Advanced, interdisciplinary course on causes, consequences, and future 
trajectory of climate change. Course will cover physical observations of past climate change, role of human 
activities in driving climate change to date, and impacts of climate change on human and natural systems. 
Course will analyze how socioeconomic choices affects future climate as well as factors influencing those choices, 
including risk analyses, geoengineering proposals, intergenerational equity, climate metrics and the media. 
Instructor: Shindell. One course. C-L: Environment 552
551S. Global Environmental Change. NS, R Topics in the seminar will include climate change, earth 
surface alteration, prediction, water and carbon cycling, sea-level rise and coastal erosion, biodiversity, 
fossil fuels and energy resources, water resources, soil fertility, human impact on coastal zone ecosystems. 
Prerequisite: consent of instructor. Instructor: Baker. One course.
567. Analyzing Time and Space Series. NS, QS Ways to extract information from data; methods for 
probing time or spatial series including spectral and wavelet analyses, correlation techniques, and nonlinear-
dynamics approaches for determining how deterministic and linear the processes producing the data are, and 
for reconstructing and quantitatively comparing state-space plots. Instructor: Murray. One course.
568S. Integrated Assessment Modeling—Examining Strategies for Meeting Energy and 
Environmental Goals. NS, STS The primary objective is to provide students with a hands-on opportunity 
to use one such Integrated Assessment Model—the Global Change Assessment Model with state-level 
resolution (GCAM-USA)—to examine the air quality and GHG implications of new and emerging energy system 
technologies. To facilitate the use of GCAM-USA, students will use the GLIMPSE decision support software 
being developed at EPA. GLIMPSE provides a user interface for GCAM, which facilitates developing and 
running scenarios as well as visualizing results. Team projects—examinations of electric vehicles, renewable 
electricity, energy efficiency in buildings and potentially other topics of interest to students. Instructor: Shindell. 
One course. C-L: Environment 568S
569. Thermodynamics of Geological Systems. NS Introductory thermodynamics applied to geologic 
problems through understanding of phase equilibrium. Prerequisites: Earth and Ocean Sciences 201; and 
Mathematics 122 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Boudreau. One course.
571. Isotopes in Earth and Environmental Sciences. NS, QS, STS The use of stable and radioactive 
isotopes in earth and environmental sciences, with applications to processes including climate change, 
hydrology, oceanography, geology and biology. Recommended prerequisite: Introductory college chemistry and 
calculus. Instructor: Baker. One course. C-L: Civil and Environmental Engineering 551, Environment 570
573S. Analytic Techniques. NS An introduction to advanced analytic procedures used in the earth sciences: 
such as electron microbeam techniques (scanning electron microscopy, electron microprobe analysis) and 
plasma emission/absorption spectroscopy. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Boudreau. One course.
575S. Mineral Resources. NS Introduction to the mineralogy, geological setting, and genesis of metallic and 
non-metallic deposits (gold, copper, iron, aluminum, gypsum, phosphates, diamonds, e.g.). Includes methods 
of mineral exploration and exploitation, and the environmental consequences of utilizing mineral resources. An 
introductory geology course background useful but not required. Instructor: Boudreau. One course.
578. Tropical Climate and Paleoclimate. NS Thermodynamics of tropical climate. Nature and 
mechanisms of climate variability in the tropics on time scales from daily to multi-millennial. Impact of climatic 
variability on the tropical biota. Effects of anthropogenic changes of the environment on future climatic change 
in the tropics and potential extratropical teleconnections. Prerequisite: Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 or 102. 
Instructor: Baker. One course.



 Earth and Ocean Sciences (EOS) 306

579LA. Biological Oceanography. NS, R Variable credit. C-L: see Environment 579LA; also C-L: Biology 
579LA, Marine Sciences
590. Special Topics in Earth and Ocean Sciences. Content to be determined each semester. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
590S. Special Topics in Earth and Ocean Sciences. Content to be determined each semester. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

The Major
The Division of Earth and Ocean Sciences offers one AB degree and one BS degree.

For the AB Degree
The AB degree in earth and ocean sciences is designed as a flexible major for those students interested in 

how the earth, atmosphere, and oceans work. The major is intended to provide a general knowledge of scientific 
issues that shape and control the environment in which we live. 

Corequisites. Mathematics 105L and 106L, or Mathematics 111, or Mathematics 122. One course from 
each of two of the following three subject areas: Biology 201, or 202, or 206; Chemistry 101DL, or 110DL; or 
Physics 141L or equivalent.

Major Requirements. Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 or 102, plus any six earth and ocean sciences courses 
of which five must be 200-level or higher, plus three additional 200-level or higher courses in earth and ocean 
sciences or related fields (biology, chemistry, environment, evolutionary anthropology, mathematics, physics, or 
statistics), as approved by the director of undergraduate studies. 

For the BS Degree
The BS degree provides a background for subsequent graduate work for those who wish to follow an 

academic or professional career track in the earth and ocean sciences.
Prerequisites. Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 and 102; Chemistry 101DL and either Chemistry 210DL or 

201DL, or equivalents; Mathematics 111L and 112L; Physics 141L; Biology 202L.
Major Requirements. Four of the following five courses: Earth and Ocean Sciences 201L, 202, 203S, 

204L, and 365, plus four additional earth and ocean sciences courses at the 200 level or higher, including one 
field-oriented class. Up to two courses from a related field (biology, environment, evolutionary anthropology, 
mathematics, physics, or statistics) may be substituted with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies.

Ocean Science
An exciting area in earth and ocean sciences is the study of the ocean realm. Majors in earth and ocean 

sciences may fulfill elective requirements with courses in marine science by studying at the Duke Marine 
Laboratory on the coast in Beaufort, North Carolina, which often include fieldwork excursions to other areas of the 
world (e.g., Hawaii, Trinidad, Singapore). Approved courses include: marine ecology; biological oceanography; 
analysis of ocean ecosystems; marine invertebrate zoology (see full course listings at https://nicholas.duke.edu/
marinelab/programs). Students typically also perform a research independent study project on a topic of interest 
supervised by a faculty member of the marine laboratory.

Graduation with Distinction
The Division of Earth and Ocean Sciences through Trinity College offers Graduation with Distinction 

through successful completion of a student research project. A candidate for Graduation with Distinction in the 
earth and ocean sciences must have a divisional grade point average of 3.2 at the beginning of the project to qualify 
for nomination. The student will apply for consideration for Graduation with Distinction by the beginning of his 
or her senior academic year by submitting an application to the director of undergraduate studies describing the 
project. The student must solicit a faculty advisor who will review the student’s record and decide to admit or reject 
the application and oversee the project. The student will normally do the work as part of research independent 
study courses (Earth and Ocean Sciences 393, 394) completed during one academic year. The project will consist 
of an original piece of scientific research which will be summarized by a written report in the style of a scientific 
publication. The student will also make an oral presentation to students and faculty of the division before the end 

https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs


East Asian Studies 307

of classes of the student’s final semester. The decision on granting Graduation with Distinction will be made by a 
vote of the student’s project committee, with a majority in favor needed for Graduation with Distinction.

The Minor
The Division of Earth and Ocean Sciences offers an option for a minor in earth and ocean sciences.
Minor Requirements. Earth and Ocean Sciences 101 or 102, plus any four additional earth and ocean 

sciences courses, of which three must be 200-level or higher. 

East Asian Studies
Professor Richard Jaffe, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The undergraduate certificate in East Asian studies is administered by the Asian/Pacific Studies Institute 

(APSI). This certificate provides students with the opportunity for interdisciplinary, in-depth study of historical 
and contemporary East Asian societies and cultures. Students construct a sequence of courses complementing 
their major field of study, enabling them to knowledgeably engage with East Asia in professional and academic 
contexts. It is particularly appropriate for students interested in the social sciences (e.g., history, political 
science, sociology, economics, public policy) as an alternative to the Asian and Middle Eastern studies minor. 
Undergraduates also have the opportunity to publish their academic work for the certificate in the student-run 
journal Duke East Asia Nexus.

Students interested in earning a certificate in East Asian studies are encouraged to declare it by their fifth 
semester. The course of study for program participants is intended to be interdisciplinary. To qualify for the 
certificate, students must take an approved gateway course, an approved capstone seminar, and four additional 
electives, including East Asian language courses. The elective courses must be at or above the 200 level. At 
least two different departments must be represented in the course selection, with no more than three courses 
originating from one single department. No more than two of the required six courses may double count for a 
major, minor, or another certificate program.

Program Requirements
The following requirements must be met in order to earn a certificate in East Asian studies:
• Students must take at least six courses from the designated East Asian studies course list, including 

East Asian language courses at the 200 level or above (see https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/
courses for course list)

• Students must take courses across at least two departments or programs.
• No more than three courses from any single department or major may count toward the certificate.
• One of the six courses must be an approved gateway course for the certificate.
• One of the six courses must be an approved capstone seminar course.
• At least four of the courses must be at the 200 level or above.

For more information on the East Asian studies certificate, visit https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/
undergraduate-certificate-east-asian-studies.

Courses in East Asian Studies
A list of approved East Asian studies courses is updated each semester on the APSI website at https://

asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses. Approved courses from previous semesters can be found in the 
course archives at https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses. Courses pre-approved as gateway classes 
or capstone seminars for the certificate are indicated on the website. In addition, students may petition for 
appropriate classes to be approved.

Economics
Professor Burnside, Chair; Professor of the Practice Fullenkamp, Director of Economics Center for Teaching; 
Research Professor Becker and Professor of the Practice Rasiel, Associate Chairs; Professor of the Practice Ful-
lenkamp, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Associate Professor of the Practice Kim, Associate Director of 

https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses
https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses
https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/undergraduate-certificate-east-asian-studies
https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/undergraduate-certificate-east-asian-studies
https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses
https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses
https://asianpacific.duke.edu/academics/courses


 Economics (ECON)308

Undergraduate Studies; Professors Abdulkadiroglu, Adler, Ambrus, Anton, Arcidiacono, Ariely, Bansal, Bayer, 
Bollerslev, Burnside, Clotfelter, Cohen, Coleman, Collard-Wexler, Conitzer, Darity, Field, Frakes, Frankenberg, 
Hoover, Hotz, Hsieh, Kimbrough, Kramer, Kranton, Kuran, Lewis, Li, Lopomo, Marx, McAdams, McElroy, Mung-
er, Nechyba, Pattanayak, Patton, Peretto, Petters, Pfaff, Pizer, Rampini, Roberts, Rosen, Sanders, Sarver, Smith, 
Tauchen, Taylor, Thomas, Timmins, Tower, Viswanathan, Xu, and Yildirim; Associate Professors Ananat, Bardhi, 
Bennear, Berger, Bianchi, Bugni, Conrad, Daley, Dix-Carneiro, Ilut, Leventoglu, Mohanan, Sadowskiand Suarez 
Serrato;  Assistant Professors Garlick, Jurado, Kehrig, Komisarow, Lanteri, Macartney, Masten, Maurel, Rangel, 
Sexton, Sidibe, Wang, and Weller; Professors Emeriti Cook, De Marchi, Grabowski, Graham, Kelley, Ladd, Sloan, 
Wallace, and Weintraub; Research Professors Emeriti Burmeister and Toniolo; Research Professors Becker, Cald-
well, and Medema; Associate Research Professors Boyd and Zanalda; Professors of the Practice Connolly, Fullen-
kamp, Leachman, Leven, Rasiel, and Ridley; Associate Professor of the Practice Kim; Assistant Professor of the 
Practice Levonmaa

A major and a minor are available in this department, as well as a finance concentration for majors and a 
finance minor.

Economics courses develop the critical and analytical skills essential for understanding economics and 
institutions, in both their contemporary and historical settings. Although no particular vocational or professional 
goal is emphasized, these courses provide the academic background necessary for positions in industry, for work 
in many branches of government service, for law school, and for graduate study in business administration, 
economics, and the social sciences.

Students planning to do graduate work in economics are advised to take as many of the following courses 
in mathematics (listed in preferential order) as their schedules permit: Mathematics 212, 221, 222, 356, and 431. 

Courses in Economics (ECON)
21. Principles of Microeconomics. This is the equivalent for Principles of Microeconomics from Advanced 
Placement on the basis of a score of 4 or 5 on the Advanced Placement Microeconomics exam, or credit for a 
sufficient score on a Duke-recognized international examination such as the International Baccalaureate. Only 
Economics 21 and Economics 22 together substitute for Economics 101. One course.
22. Principles of Macroeconomics. This is the equivalent for Principles of Macroeconomics from Advanced 
Placement on the basis of a score of 4 or 5 on the Advanced Placement Macroeconomics exam, or credit for a 
sufficient score on a Duke-recognized international examination such as the International Baccalaureate. Only 
Economics 21 and Economics 22 together substitute for Economics 101. One course.
23. Principles of Microeconomics. This is the equivalent for Principles of Microeconomics taken at another 
school or Duke-In Program. Only Econ 23 and Econ 24 together substitute for Econ 101. One course.
24. Principles of Macroeconomics. This is the equivalent for Principles of Macroeconomics taken at 
another school or Duke-In Program. Only Econ 23 and Econ 24 together substitute for Econ 101. One course.
80S. Special Topics. Introductory special topics course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Economic Principles. Basic microeconomic concepts such as demand and supply, market structures and 
pricing, market efficiency and equilibrium. Macroeconomic concepts such as inflation, unemployment, trade, 
economic growth and development. Different perspectives on issues of monetary and fiscal policy. Emphasis 
on public policy issues and the logic behind the economic way of thinking. Open to all students. Instructor: 
Fullenkamp, Leachman, or staff. One course.
101D. Economic Principles. Basic microeconomic concepts such as demand and supply, market structures 
and pricing, market efficiency and equilibrium. Macroeconomic concepts such as inflation, unemployment, 
trade, economic growth and development. Different perspectives on issues of monetary and fiscal policy. 
Emphasis on public policy issues and the logic behind the economic way of thinking. Open to all students. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
104D. Statistical Foundations of Econometrics and Data Science. QS Rigorous introduction 
to statistical concepts that underpin econometrics. Course emphasizes conceptual understanding, uses 
mathematics to illustrate ideas, and applies ideas to examples from economics broadly construed. Students 
analyze data to reinforce understanding. Topics include experimental and non-experimental research designs; 
modern approaches to summarizing data; random variables, probability, expectations, density and distribution 



Economics (ECON) 309

functions; sampling; estimation; inference and hypothesis testing; introduction to linear regression. First course 
in two-semester econometrics sequence. Prerequisite: Mathematics 21, 106L,111L, 112L, 121, 122, 122L, 202, 
202D, 212, or 222. Instructor: Staff. One course.
111D. Introduction to the History of Economic and Business Cultures. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 107D
112FS. Globalization and Corporate Citizenship. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 160FS; also 
C-L: History 127FS, Public Policy 187FS
119. Introduction to Political Economy. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 145; also C-L: 
Energy and the Environment, Markets and Management Studies
174. Financial Accounting. QS, SS Introductory course in financial accounting. How and why information is 
created and communicated. Purposes of financial accounting. Bookkeeping for basic business transactions that 
map into the statements. Analyze corporate reports. Interpret key financial information. Course is designed for 
students with little or no background in accounting. Does not count for economics major or minor requirements. 
Instructor: Skender or Staff. One course.
190. Selected Topics In Economics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190AS. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Topics in Economics. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Topics vary 
each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Selected Topics in Economics. Topics differ by section. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S-1. Selected Topics In Economics. Topics differ by section. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
201D. Intermediate Microeconomics I. SS Introduction of the concepts of preferences and technologies. 
Intermediate development of the theory of demand, supply and competitive equilibrium from individual 
preferences and technologies. Income and substitution effects, uncompensated demand and marginal 
willingness to pay. Conditions under which competitive markets result in efficient outcomes. Conditions under 
which government policy has the potential to increase efficiency. Tension between economic efficiency and 
different notions of equity. Prerequisite: Economics 21 and 22 or 101, 101D; and Mathematics 21 or 111L or 105L 
and 106L, or 112L, 121, 122, 202, 212, or higher level math. Instructor: Staff. One course.
204D. Econometrics and Data Science. QS, R This course is designed to build on the foundation laid 
in 104. Students will develop the skills necessary to analyze and interpret real world data using modern data 
science methods and ultimately provide them with the toolkit to be sophisticated consumers and producers of 
empirical research in econ as well as other fields in the social, health and life sciences. Mastery of the material 
is intended to provide students with sufficient knowledge of and econometric and data science methods to think 
critically about the quality of evidence in support of a claim about how individuals behave, markets work, firms 
make money or societies operate. Prerequisite: (Economics 21 and 22, Economics 23 and 24, Economics 101, 
Economics 101D, or Economics 201D) and (Economics 104D or Statistical Science 111). Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
205D. Intermediate Microeconomics II. QS, SS Calculus-based generalization of the theory of demand 
and supply developed in Economics 201D. Individual behavior in environments of risk and uncertainty. 
Introduction to game theory and strategic interaction. Adverse selection, moral hazard, non-competitive market 
structures, externalities, public goods. Prerequisite: Economics 201D; Mathematics 202 or Mathematics 212 or 
Mathematics 222 or any higher-level mathematics course with Mathematics 212 as a prerequisite. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
208D. Introduction to Econometrics. QS, R Introduction to the theory and practice of econometrics. 
Estimation, hypothesis testing and model evaluation in the linear regression model. Observational and 



 Economics (ECON)310

experimental methods to identify causal effects including instrumental variable and panel data methods. 
Lectures are supplemented by labs that use STATA. Prerequisite: Economics 21 and 22 or 23 and 24 or 101 or 
101D or 201, and Mathematics 112L or 122L or 202 or 212 or higher; and Statistical Science 111 or Mathematics 
340/Statistical Science 231 or Mathematics 342/Statistical Science 250 or Statistical Science 130. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
210D. Intermediate Macroeconomics. QS, SS, STS Intermediate level treatment of macroeconomic 
models, fiscal and monetary policy, inflation, unemployment, economic growth. Prerequisite: Economics 201D, 
and Mathematics 202, 212, or 222. Economics 205D is also required as a prerequisite or a co-requisite to be 
taken concurrently with Econ 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
212. Engineering Systems Optimization and Economics. SS One course. C-L: see Engineering 305
213. Follow the Ruble: Money in Russian Literature and Culture. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Russian 318; also C-L: International Comparative Studies, Ethics Elective, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
222D. American Business History. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see History 364D; also C-L: Markets 
and Management Studies
223S. Legal Issues for the Performing Arts. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 311S; also C-L: 
Public Policy 363S, Dance 379S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 311S
224. Neoclassical Economics and Its Opponents: What Even Is ‘Mainstream’?. CZ, SS Why do 
economics departments teach the theories they teach today? And how do these theories impact the real world? 
This course surveys the historical development of the economics discipline with a focus on those schools of 
thought that contested what is now mainstream economics. After a brief history of neoclassical economics, we 
will examine a few of its challengers: institutional economics, Keynesianism, and behavioral economics. We 
will discuss how their theories differ from neoclassicism, and their influence on US economic policy at several 
moments in the twentieth century. Course focuses on understanding theory by reading works by influential 
economists throughout the history of economics. Instructor: Benack. One course.
241D. From Machine Learning to Ethnography: Puzzles and Approaches to International 
Development. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 258D
247S. Non-Profit Cultural Institutions. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 310S; also C-L: 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship 310S, Visual and Media Studies 329S, Public Policy 318S, Dance 208S
255S. Shakespeare & Financial Markets: Why This Time is Never Different. CCI, SS Course 
discusses how lessons from Shakespeare’s plays can provide insight into human behavior in today’s financial 
markets. Plays will include Hamlet, Julius Caesar, Twelfth Night, and others. Lessons about policy errors, 
cultural and political dislocation, regime changes, demographic conflicts etc. in current financial and 
macroeconomic environments. Discussion will include human biases in decision-making, and how these 
transcend cultural and historic boundaries. An important component of this class is understanding how to 
integrate themes from classical literature to better understand current socioeconomic trends. Instructor: 
Forlines. One course. C-L: Public Policy 257S
256. Practical Financial Markets. Familiarizes students with the practical, hands-on tools and 
knowledge required for careers in the financial markets. Topics covered include: securities markets; corporate 
valuation techniques including DCF, Comps, Precedent Transactions, LBO and IPO models; equity research 
methodologies; asset allocation and risk-return analytics; current market news and events; regulation; ethics; 
contemporary finance/business issues as applicable. Open only to sophomores. Instructor: Rasiel. One course.
260A. Economics of a United Europe. CCI, SS Implications of a common monetary policy, common 
welfare standards, unemployment, and migration in the European Union. (Taught only in the Duke-in-Berlin 
Program.) Instructor: Tolksdorf. One course. C-L: German 321A, International Comparative Studies
269A. Australia and the Asia-Pacific Economies. CCI, SS Economic growth, development, immigration, 
foreign investment, deregulation, privatization, tax reform, and financial liberalization in Australia and the 
Asia-Pacific. ASEAN. Taught only in the Duke-in-Australia Program. Instructor: Lodewijks. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
270. Life Within Capitalism: A History of its Values, Measures and Struggles. CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 249; also C-L: Study of Ethics 271, History 284, Political Science 252



Economics (ECON) 311

274. Advanced Financial and Managerial Accounting. QS, SS Problems of liability valuation and the 
related issues of income determination from the perspective of the financial analyst. Studies the assessment of 
past and future performance with an introduction to equity valuation. Accounting and reporting problems of 
complex corporate structures. Use of accounting information for internal purposes for planning and control. 
Prerequisites: Economics 174. Instructor: Skender. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
281A. Building and Sustaining a Successful Enterprise. SS One course. C-L: see Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 271A; also C-L: Markets and Management Studies
285. Denial, Faith, Reason: Sustainability and Survival. EI One course. C-L: see Public Policy 284; also 
C-L: Study of Ethics 285, Environment 276, History 325, Sustainability Engagement 276
290. Selected Topics In Economics. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ by section. 
Check individual semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ by section. 
Check individual semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290FS. Focus Program Topics in Economics. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Topics vary 
each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Selected Topics In Economics. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295. Intellectual Property and Innovation: Law, Policy & Entrepreneurship. EI, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Markets and Management Studies 425; also C-L: Sociology 425, Information Science + Studies 
425, Public Policy 425
298D. Discovering Education and Human Development I: How Social Scientists Learn from 
Data. EI, R, SS How does what happens in families, schools and communities shape individuals and the 
world around them? How can we learn what really matters? Course explores variety of ways in which various 
methods of social sciences can and cannot give answers to these basic questions and how practitioners wrestle 
with ethical implications of their work. Main focus is on thinking critically about claims made by researchers. 
Prominent Duke faculty from various social science disciplines who are open to involving students in their 
work will participate. Social Science Research Institute, including Bass community in Education and Human 
Development, will support students in explorations of research topics. Instructor: Nechyba. One course. C-L: 
Education 298D, Sociology 298D, Psychology 242D
302. Introduction to Economic History. CCI, CZ, SS A survey of Western economic history: population, 
production, exchange, and institutions; from antiquity to the present. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: History 306, International Comparative Studies 303
303A. Political Philosophy of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 237A; also 
C-L: Political Science 297A, Public Policy 204A
304. The International Economy, 1850-Present: From Globalization to Globalization. CCI, CZ, 
SS Developments in the international economy (trade, migrations, capital movements), their causes and impact, 
against the background of “modern economic growth.” The rapid integration of the Atlantic economy from 
the 1850s to the early 1910s, the subsequent “globalization backlash” (war, great depression and war again), 
and the slow reconstruction of international economic networks since 1945. Comparison of the current second 
globalization with the first one that came to an abrupt end in August 1914. Prerequisites: Economics 21 and 22 
or 101 and Mathematics 21, or 122, or 122L, or 202, or 212 or higher level math. Instructor: Zanalda or Staff. 
One course. C-L: History 310, International Comparative Studies 304
305. History of International Financial and Monetary Crises. CZ, EI, SS Course examines 
monetary/financial crises plaguing world since 16th century. Analyzes origin, unfolding, and impact of crises, 
debates generated by them, and formulation/implementation of policy measures. Attention to international 
implications/connections on European/Asian money supply, banking/credit systems; reaction to South Sea 
Bubble and John Law Credit Systems in numerous European nations; experiments with paper money in 
America; rise/demise of gold standard in 19th/20th century; currency and exchange rate problems of last three 
decades. Case studies will be selected and assigned according to participants’ interests. Prerequisites: Economics 
205D and 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 305, International Comparative Studies 305



 Economics (ECON)312

305A. History of International Financial and Monetary Crises. CZ, EI, SS Course seeks to examine 
monetary/financial crises plaguing world since 16th century. It analyzes origin, unfolding, and impact of 
crises, debates generated by them, and formulation/implementation of policy measures. It pays attention to 
international implications/connections on European and Asian money supply, banking and credit systems; 
reaction to South Sea Bubble and John Law Credit Systems in numerous European nations; experiments 
with paper money in America; rise and demise of the gold standard in the 19th and 20th century; currency 
and exchange rate problems of the last three decades. Case studies will be selected and assigned according to 
participants’ interests. Prerequisite: Economics 205D and 210D. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: 
Caccavale. One course.
306. Economic History and Modernization of the Islamic Middle East. CCI, CZ, SS, W Economic 
development of the Middle East from the rise of Islam to the present. Transformation of the region from an 
economically advanced area into part of the underdeveloped world. Role of religion in economic successes 
and failures. Obstacles to development today. Topics: Islamic economic institutions, economic roles of Islamic 
law, innovation and change, political economy of modernization, interactions with other regions, economic 
consequences of Islamism. Prerequisite: Economics 101 or 21 and 22 or instructor consent. Instructor: Kuran. 
One course. C-L: Political Science 351, Islamic Studies
307. Understanding Financial Bubbles and Crises. SS Examines the similarities/differences of historical 
financial crises from “Tulipmania” through the Great Recession to better understand our current economic 
environment. Explores the regulatory changes that are enacted post-crisis and determines factors that might 
prevent future economic bubbles/crises. Class includes guest speakers from the NY financial community who 
experienced recent crises from 1987 Black Monday Crash through Credit Crisis of 2008 to provide an inside 
view and feel of the markets during those periods. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Caccavale. One 
course.
307A. Understanding Financial Bubbles and Crises. SS This course, offered on the Duke in London 
Finance summer program, examines the similarities/differences of historical financial crises, from “Tulipmania” 
through the Great Recession of 2008, to better understand our current economic environment. The class 
explores the regulatory changes that are enacted post-crisis and determines factors that might prevent future 
economic bubbles/crises. Class includes guest speakers from the London financial community to provide 
an inside view and feel of the markets during those periods as well as current topics in the financial arena. 
Prerequisite: Economics 101. Instructor: Caccavale. One course.
309. Anthropology of Money. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 350; also C-L: 
Public Policy 306, International Comparative Studies 328, African & African American Studies 211
311. History of Economic Thought. CCI, R, SS, W Approaches to economic problems from Aristotle to 
Keynes, emphasizing certain models and doctrines—their origins, relevance, and evolution. Readings from Mun, 
Quesnay, Adam Smith, Malthus, Ricardo, Marx, Walras, Veblen, and Keynes. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 307, Marxism and Society, International Comparative Studies
312S. Adam Smith and the System of Natural Liberty. SS, STS A seminar focused on the writings of 
Adam Smith, including close readings of The Wealth of Nations and The Theory of Moral Sentiments, and 
selections from Mandeville, Hutcheson, Hume, Quesnay, Turgot, and Bentham. Focus on eighteenth-century 
views on the nature of society and the origins of prosperity, the luxury debate, and links between natural 
philosophy (including medical thought), and moral philosophy. Recommended prerequisite: Economics 311. 
Instructor: Hoover. One course. C-L: History 308S, Philosophy 312S
313. The Uses of Economics. CZ, R, SS, STS, W The various ways economics is used in contemporary 
society: in the scholarly community, government, private sector, civil society, other disciplines, and popular 
culture. Readings in original texts and interpretative commentaries. Prerequisites: Economics 201D. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
314S. The History of Modern Macroeconomics from Keynes to the Present. SS, W Examination 
of key developments in macroeconomics from the 1930s through the present. Case studies of the evolution 
of macroeconomics in political and social context. Topics include the theory of unemployment in the Great 
Depression; growth theory and the rise of business cycle modeling in the aftermath of World War II; the trade-
off between inflation and unemployment in the 1950s and 1960s; the debate over monetarism in the age of 
stagflation; and the rise of the New Classical Macroeconomics in its aftermath. Prerequisite: Economics 210D. 



Economics (ECON) 313

Instructor: Hoover. One course. C-L: History 309S
319. The Philosophy and Methodology of Economics. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 345
320A. Globalization and Deglobalization. FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 350A; also C-L: Political 
Science 320A, Public Policy 356A, International Comparative Studies 363A
321S. Art and Markets. ALP, CCI, R, SS Three courses. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 567S; also C-L: 
Markets and Management Studies
322SA. Economics of Creative Goods. R, SS Creative industries (especially the arts, entertainment) 
often distinguished by peculiarities of product (for example, non-durable), by special nature of financing and 
contracting (for example, option contracts), and by challenges they present to conventional analysis of pricing 
and consumption. Research report required. (Taught only in the Duke-in-Venice Program.) Prerequisites: 
Economics 201D or instructor’s consent. Instructor: De Marchi. One course.
324A. International Finance. SS For students in Duke-in-NY Financial Markets & Institutions Program 
only. Provides working knowledge of international business finance, including currency, markets and manager 
behavior of international corporations. Emphasis on mechanics of foreign exchange market, reviewing tools 
used to hedge exchange rate risk. Construct building blocks of international finance: interest rate parity, 
purchasing power parity and international Fisher arbitrage equation. Address management issues, such as 
transfer pricing, offshore banking, working capital management, international M&A, business planning, and 
optimal international portfolios. Analyze international financial scams, swindles and trading abuses. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
325S. Economic Analysis of Current Energy Issues. SS, STS Examination of present-day sources 
and end-users of energy in U.S. and selected foreign nations with attention to external cost of energy systems. 
Fossil fuel prospects, new and renewable energy sources and nuclear power. Opportunities for increasing 
energy productivity. Proposals for dealing with climate change. Course equips students to evaluate proposals 
and arguments from all sides of the energy debates using facts and analysis. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. 
Instructor: Boyd or staff. One course. C-L: Energy 325S
326. Islam and the State: Political Economy of Governance in the Middle East. CCI, CZ, R, 
SS Lecture version of Economics 326S. Introduction to political history of Middle East from advent of Islam 
14 centuries ago to modern era. Four objectives: (1) familiarize students with institutions responsible for 
characteristics of political development in region; (2) examine particular transformations/selected cases of 
inertia to derive lessons about mechanisms that govern political development, including democratization; (3) 
investigate how religion shaped region’s political trajectory; (4) identify social forces, especially economic forces, 
driving contemporary rediscovery/reinterpretation of Islam’s political organization and requirements, by both 
Islamists and secular political actors. Instructor: Kuran. One course. C-L: Political Science 308, Islamic Studies
330A. The Economic and Political History of the European Union. CCI, CZ, FL, SS One course. C-L: 
see French 351A; also C-L: Political Science 325A, Public Policy 351A, History 331A
331SA. The Economics of the Energiewende in Germany. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see German 
362SA; also C-L: Environment 367SA
333. Private Equity. SS Introduces students to the process of private equity investments, including evaluating 
potential investments, deal structure and financing, and key drivers of value. Students will learn about a range 
of private investment styles, from early stage to mature investments, with a focus on acquisitions of existing 
mid-market firms for value enhancement utilizing various strategies. The course will include both in-class 
discussions and lectures from visiting speakers from the private equity world. Prerequisite: Economics 205D or 
372. Instructor: Forlines. One course.
334. Health Economics. EI, SS, W Economic aspects of the production, distribution, and organization of 
health care services, such as measuring output, structure of markets, demand for services, pricing of services, 
cost of care, financing, mechanisms, and their impact on the relevant markets. Prerequisite: Economics 205D or 
Public Policy Studies 303D. Instructor: Falba, Sloan or staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 331
335. Economics of Global Health. SS, STS Examines reciprocal relationships between income, poverty and 
health across countries with focus on identifying effect of health on development. Addresses structural problems 
in delivery and quality of healthcare that arise from cultural as well as economic causes. Attention given to 



 Economics (ECON)314

challenges of healthcare financing, and tension between high-tech care and basic care in developing countries. 
Students examine empirical evidence from interventions affecting health including infant mortality reduction 
programs. Focus on issues of poverty alleviation and the promise of foreign aid. Prerequisites: Economics 201 or 
Public Policy 303 and Economics 208 or Public Policy 604 or instructor consent. Instructor: Field. One course. 
C-L: Global Health 335
336D. Computational Microeconomics. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 323D
337S. Social Inequalities and Low-Wage Work. EI, SS This course introduces students to several, 
different economic theories and viewpoints regarding social inequality, class, and socio-economic status in 
the United States. Current debates are discussed, such as the possible raising of the minimum wage. Students 
also gain first-hand knowledge concerning the livelihood strategies of low-wage workers in Durham, through 
students’ participation in a service-learning project in the community. Instructor: Miller. One course.
338. Economics of the Public Sector. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 304
339. Environmental Economics and Policy. QS, SS, STS The role of the environment in the theory and 
practice of economics. Topics include ways in which markets fail to efficiently allocate resources in the presence 
of pollution, along with the array of policies regulators used to correct those failures; the empirical techniques 
used by economists to put values on environmental commodities; and an examination of questions related to 
everyday environmental issues, particularly those confronting the developing world. Prerequisites: Economics 
201D and one Statistics course; Economics 208D recommended. One course. C-L: Environment 363, Marine 
Science and Conservation, Energy and the Environment. Instructor: Timmins. One course. C-L: Environment 
363, Marine Science and Conservation, Energy and the Environment
343. The Contemporary Art Market. ALP, R, SS Historical and analytical study of the way art objects 
have been produced and marketed. Peculiarities of the product, applicable sales techniques, and pricing 
procedures. Attention to the role of dealers, auctioneers, the art of criticism and formation of preferences, and 
innovation. Comparative and longitudinal examinations of the evolution of practices, institutions, and the 
regulatory environment in art markets. Pre-req: Economics 201D. Instructor: De Marchi. One course. C-L: Art 
History 261, Markets and Management Studies
344. History of Art Markets. R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 242
344D. History of Art Markets. R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 242D
345. Urban Economics. EI, R, SS, W Introduction to urban and spatial economics. Neoclassical 
monocentric city spatial model, patterns of land values, property prices, residential density and impact of 
distressed communities on broader development. Systems of cities and regional growth, role of cities in 
economic development. United States urban features: ethical and socio-economic effects of housing segregation 
and implications for discrimination. Tradeoffs between efficiency and fairness in housing resource allocation. 
Business location theory, impact of innovations in transportation, and technology’s effect on work patterns. 
Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Becker. One course.
346. Philosophical and Conceptual Problems of Entrepreneurship. SS One course. C-L: see 
Philosophy 447; also C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 447
347. African Economic Development. R, SS, W This course will seek to provide students with a realistic 
picture of African economies and societies today, emphasizing their heterogeneity and accomplishments, as 
well as focusing on reasons for continued widespread poverty throughout the continent. The course develops 
behavioral models that can be used to explain and predict household, market, and government behaviors and 
outcomes. Students are expected to quickly acquire basic stylized facts and economic models, and then analyze 
one of the many data sets now available. Instructor: Becker. One course.
348. Women in the Economy. CCI, EI, R, SS Economics of gender including the status of women in 
the labor market; feminist economic theories; ethical considerations of gender-based inequalities; gendered 
division of labor within the family and between the household and labor market. Situation of women in 
developing countries undergoing transition to market economies; gender-related measurements and indicators; 
explanations and remedies for female/male occupational segregation and wage differentials. Prerequisite: 
Economics 201D. Instructor: McElroy or staff. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 230, 
International Comparative Studies 348



Economics (ECON) 315

351S. The Economic and Political Performance of Civilizations. CCI, CZ, R, SS Critical survey of 
theories concerning the economic and political development of major civilizations, with an emphasis on the 
causes of differences that took shape and persisted over long time periods. The theories covered address the 
roles of institutions, cultures, legal systems, beliefs, family structures, religions, institutions, technologies, 
geography, and natural resources. Interactions between economic and political development. Prerequisite: Econ 
201D, or instructor consent. Instructor: Kuran. One course. C-L: Political Science 327S
353. Financial Institutions. SS, STS The operations of commercial and central banking and non-banking 
financial institutions and instruments in the United States, determination of monetary aggregates and interest 
rates, the financial impacts of Treasury operations, and the linkages from Federal Reserve actions to price level, 
employment, economic growth, and balance of payments objectives. Coverage of models of monetary economics 
(for example the Cagan money demand function, cash in advance models). The dynamics and real effects of 
inflation. Prerequisite: Economics 210D or 372. Instructor: Leachman, Kim, Kimbrough, or staff. One course.
353A. Financial Institutions. SS, STS Duke-in-NY Financial Markets and Institutions Program. The 
operations of commercial and central banking and non-banking financial institutions and instruments in the 
United States, determination of monetary aggregates and interest rates, the financial impacts of Treasury 
operations, and the linkages from Federal Reserve actions to price level, employment, economic growth, and 
balance of payments objectives. Coverage of models of monetary economics (for example the Cagan money 
demand function, cash in advance models). The dynamics and real effects of inflation. Instructor consent 
required. Prerequisite: Economics 210D. Instructor: Kim. One course.
353S. Financial Institutions. SS, STS The operations of commercial and central banking and non-banking 
financial institutions and instruments in the United States, determination of monetary aggregates and interest 
rates, the financial impacts of Treasury operations, and the linkages from Federal Reserve actions to price level, 
employment, economic growth, and balance of payments objectives. Coverage of models of monetary economics 
(for example the Cagan money demand function, cash in advance models). The dynamics and real effects of 
inflation. Prerequisite: Economics 210D or 372. Instructor: Leachman, Kim, Kimbrough, or staff. One course.
355. International Trade. CCI, SS, STS Topics include United States trade policies and protectionism, the 
North American Free Trade area, trade and economic relations with industrialized countries, policies toward 
developing countries and multilateral institutions, macroeconomic policy coordination, and relations with 
Europe. Prerequisites: Economics 201D. Instructor: Leachman or staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 288, 
Markets and Management Studies
355A. International Trade. CCI, SS, STS, W Topics include United States trade policies and protectionism, 
the North American Free Trade area, trade and economic relations with industrialized countries, policies toward 
developing countries and multilateral institutions, macroeconomic policy coordination, and relations with 
Europe. Director of Undergraduate Studies consent required. Offered through Duke in New York Program. 
Prerequisites: Economics 201D. Instructor: Leachman. One course.
361. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 331; also 
C-L: Philosophy 246, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 331, Ethics Elective, Information 
Science + Studies, Human Rights
361D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 331D; 
also C-L: Philosophy 246D, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies
362. Discovering Game Theory: Social Complexity and Strategic Interdependence. QS, SS One 
course. C-L: see Political Science 217; also C-L: Duke Center for Interdisciplinary Decison Sciences 201
368. Behavioral Finance: A Taxonomy of Money Mistakes. SS Uses popular and accepted theories 
of human behavior from the fields of psychology and decision-making to characterize some prevalent features 
of irrational behavior in financial markets. Includes discussion of typical errors made by financial market 
participants as a result of behavioral biases, and examination of the extent to which irrationality can affect 
financial markets at the aggregate level (“bubbles”), how long irrationality may persist, and what factors will 
eventually cause these bubbles to burst (“crashes”). Instructor consent required. Prerequisite: Economics 205. 
Instructor: Rasiel. One course. C-L: Psychology 368
368A. Behavioral Finance: A Taxonomy of Money Mistakes. SS We will use popular and accepted 
theories of human behavior from the fields of psychology and decision-making to characterize some prevalent 



 Economics (ECON)316

features of irrational behavior in the financial markets. We will discuss typical errors made by financial market 
participants as a result of behavioral biases, and examine the extent to which irrationality can affect financial 
markets at the aggregate level (“bubbles”), how long irrationality may persist, and what factors will eventually 
cause these bubbles to burst (“crashes”). Prerequisite: Economics 205D. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Rasiel. One course. C-L: Psychology 368A
369. People and Poverty: Policymaking in Theory and in Practice. R, SS Students will use a 
combination of news articles and research papers to study the problems faced by the world’s poor and to analyze 
specific policies that have been designed to resolve them. The broad goal of this course is to learn how to use 
econ models, empirical analysis, and experiments “in the field” to gain a deeper understanding of poverty, in 
order to design and implement more effective policies in the future. Prerequisite: Economics 201D and calculus. 
Instructor: Wang. One course.
370. Global Capital Markets. SS, W Financial markets and the role of investment banks as intermediaries. 
Divisions and functions within investment banks: sales and trading, corporate finance, research and wealth 
management. Aspects of asset pricing and corporate valuation. Impact of current events on financial markets. 
Intended primarily for sophomores interested in a career in financial markets. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
370A. Global Capital Markets. SS, W This course, offered on the Duke in Chicago Finance summer 
program, examines financial markets and the role of investment banks as intermediaries. Divisions and 
functions within investment banks: sales and trading, corporate finance, research, and wealth management. 
Impact of global current events on financial markets around the world, and the importance of Chicago as a 
global financial center. Visiting speakers from Chicago-based firms provide in-depth analysis of the various roles 
and opportunities in the Chicago financial arena. Instructor: Caccavale. One course.
371. Labor and Family Economics. QS, R, SS Bridges gap between economic theory and real world data 
by giving students guided experience in answering real research questions using real data, drawing examples 
from the literature. Oral presentations and written summary/critiques of published papers in a workshop 
setting. Students work with cross-section and panel data sets, with the aim of learning to manage such data 
and give credible answers to research questions by coping with problems such as omitted variable and selection 
bias, unobserved differences across agents, and endogeneity. Research questions drawn from labor, family, and 
public economics. Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 208D. Instructor: McElroy. One course.
372. Asset Pricing and Risk Management. QS, SS Integrates micro and macro economics with topics in 
finance. Utility maximization within mean variance framework for portfolio analysis and capital asset pricing 
model. Corporate valuation and discounted cash flow analysis. Capital structure and principal-agent problem 
will lead into a discussion of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis and underlying assumptions. Market pricing, 
forecasting, and financial crises. Prerequisite: Economics 101 (or Economics 21 and 22); Statistical Science 111, 
or 130, or 230, or 210, or 250, or BME 244L; Economics 205D, or Mathematics 212 or Mathematics 222, or 
Mathematics 216. Instructor: Rasiel. One course.
373. Corporate Finance. QS, R, SS Major corporate decisions from the perspective of the firm with an 
emphasis on the interaction of the firm with financial markets: quantitative project evaluation for investment, 
choice between borrowing and issuing stock, dividend policy, organizational form (for example, mergers and 
acquisitions). Introduction to financial markets: asset pricing, issuing stocks, analyzing financial performance 
using relative value tools, and options. Prerequisite: Economics Majors: Economics 205D and 208D; Economics 
or Financial Economics Minors: Economics 372. Instructor: Fullenkamp. One course. C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
374S. New Ventures Operating Plan. SS Course allows teams to follow structured process in carrying out 
analysis aimed at development of complete operating/business plan for new corporate venture. Four major 
areas form basis of operating plan: core competencies, elements of operating plan, budget, and financing plan. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
375. The Economics of Entrepreneurship. SS Application of microeconomic theory, such as game theory 
and industrial organization, to analyze business start-ups and their development. Focus on evaluation of the role 
of entrepreneurs in the macroeconomy, and the microeconomic performance of young businesses. The effects of 
government policies and economic fluctuations on entrepreneurs will be addressed, as well as an understanding 
of the organization and financial structure, development, and allocational decisions of growing entrepreneurial 



Economics (ECON) 317

ventures. Pre-requisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Kim. One course. C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
375
375A. Economics of Entrepreneurship. SS Duke-in-NY Financial Markets & Institutions Program. 
Application of microeconomics theory, such as game theory and industrial organization, to analyze business 
start-ups and their development. Focus on evaluation of the role of entrepreneurs in the macroeconomy, and the 
microeconomic performance of young businesses. The effects of government policies and economic fluctuations 
on entrepreneurs will be addressed, as well as an understanding of the organization and financial structure, 
development, and allocational decisions of growing entrepreneurial ventures. Instructor consent required. 
Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Kim. One course.
377. The Economics of Financial Derivatives & Financial Engineering. SS Introduction to derivatives 
focused on economic functions as tools for hedging/risk management. Topics include: forwards, futures, 
swaps, options, parity conditions, binomial options pricing, Black-Scholes formula, financial engineering 
for risk management Value-at-Risk (VAR). Emphasis on intuition and common sense implementation of 
technical material. Abuses and potentials for arbitrage profits considered. Prerequisite: Economics 205D or 
372. Recommended prerequisite: either a statistics/probability course or demonstrated knowledge of basic 
probability concepts such as discrete and continuous probability distributions, expected value, variance, and 
correlation. Instructor: Rasiel. One course.
377A. The Economics of Financial Derivatives & Financial Engineering. QS, SS Duke-in-NY Finance 
Program. Introduction to derivatives focused on economic functions as tools for hedging/risk management. 
Topics include: forwards, futures, swaps, options, parity conditions, binomial options pricing, Black-Scholes 
formula, financial engineering for risk management Value-at-Risk (VAR). Emphasis on intuition and 
common sense implementation of technical material. Abuses and potentials for arbitrage profits considered. 
Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 210D; and either a statistics/probability course or demonstrated knowledge 
of basic probability concepts such as means, variances, and covariances. 300 or 400 level finance class helpful 
but not required. DUS consent required. Instructor: Tauchen. One course.
378. Financial Risk Management. QS, SS Identifying, measuring, and dealing with risk factors faced by 
firms in increasingly complex financial system. Course examines major types of financial risks faced by firms 
and introduces models for measuring, and frameworks for managing risk, and the main tools used in financial 
risk management, with application to real-world examples and case studies. Assessment of models, tools and 
frameworks for managing various risks. Attention given to role of public policy in shaping practice of risk 
management. Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 210D. Instructor: Fullenkamp. One course.
379. Emerging Markets: Finance, Trade, Institutions and the World Economy. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Analyzes rise of emerging markets/economies and their new role in the context of global economy. Focus 
on post-1970s growth of countries such as China, India, South Korea, Chile, Mexico, and Brazil (and/or other 
countries according to students’ interests) with particular emphasis on financial, industrial/trading and 
institutional aspects, linking such rise to the emergence of vast global economic imbalances and new trend in 
capital and trade flows of the last decade. Explores economic and policy challenges these countries and their 
companies increasingly face and implications for the world economy. Prereqs: Econ 205D and Econ 210D. 
Instructor: Zanalda. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 379
381S. Inside Hedge Funds. SS Background and evolution of hedge funds, their structure, and various 
investment strategies. An analysis of why hedge funds have become the most prolific investment vehicles in 
the world, and why they have become the key customer base to investment banks. There will be a range of 
guest lecturers from the hedge fund world that will provide a bird’s-eye view into the industry. Prerequisite: 
Economics 372. Instructor: Hughes. One course.
382. Asset Management. An interdisciplinary approach to asset management, providing introduction 
to a discipline that has wide-ranging implications for all businesses. Begins with an overview of portfolio 
management and valuation tools, then discussion of different investment vehicles (hedge funds, private equity, 
venture capital) and asset classes (real estate, fixed income, commodities, emerging markets, currencies). The 
course will conclude with an overview of the history of asset management (including market crises) as well as 
topics of current interest and likely future impact to investors. Course led by Prof. Jones; will include lectures 
from a number of investment professionals from DUMAC. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Jones. 
One course.



 Economics (ECON)318

383. Foreign Exchange Markets. SS The course is a focused look at foreign exchange markets investigating 
classic economic models, structure of institutions and regimes, identifying and hedging exposure and methods 
for trading and related topical issues. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Leven. One course.
383A. Foreign Exchange Markets. SS The course is a focused look at foreign exchange markets 
investigating classic economic models, structure of institutions and regimes, identifying and hedging exposure 
and methods for trading and related topical issues. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Leven. One course.
389. Politics, Philosophy, and Economics Capstone. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 449; 
also C-L: Philosophy 465
390. Selected Topics in Economics. Topics vary by semester. Prerequisite: Economics 201D; check 
individual semester offerings for additional prerequisites. Instructor permission usually an option. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ 
by section. Prerequisite: Economics 201D; check individual semester offerings for additional prerequisites. 
Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
390AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Economics. Seminar version 
of Economics 390A. Topics differ by section. Prerequisite: Economics 201D; check individual offerings for 
additional prerequisites. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Selected Topics in Economics. Topics vary by semester. Prerequisite: Economics 201D; check 
individual semester offerings for additional prerequisites. Instructor permission usually an option. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
392. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: Economics 205D and Economics 210D. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R Same as Economics 393, but for second-semester juniors and 
seniors. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: Economics 205D and 210D. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
407. Soviet and Post-Soviet Economic History. CCI, CZ, W This course traces economic factors leading 
to the downfall of the Russian Empire and the rise of the USSR, followed by an assessment of the collapse of 
the USSR. Particular attention is devoted to the NEP period, earlier Soviet economic models, the famine of the 
1930s, the impact of WWII, industrialization and urbanization, Soviet planning, and declining productivity 
growth and life expectancy in the in the 1970s and 1980s. The course then explores the economic consequences 
of the USSR’s collapse as well as the nature of recovery in various countries that followed. The course concludes 
with an overview of formal political economy models. Prerequisite: Economics 201D and (Economics 208D or 
204D, either of which can be taken concurrently). Instructor: Becker. One course. C-L: History 407, Russian 407
413. Forecasting Financial Markets. QS, SS Introduces statistical models for financial price and risk. 
ARMA, GARCH, Value-at-Risk. Covers both theory underlying these models and practical implementation using 
statistical software (MATLAB). Prerequisites: Mathematics 202, or 212, or 216, or 221, or 222; and Economics 
208D, or Statistics 111, or Statistics 130, or Statistics 230/Mathematics 230, or Statistics 250/Mathematics 342. 
Instructor: Patton. One course. One course.
432S. Environmental Justice: The Economics of Race, Place, and Pollution. EI, R, SS, 



Economics (ECON) 319

W Minorities, people of color, and low-income households bear a disproportionate burden from environmental 
pollution. Since the Clinton Administration, addressing environmental injustice has been among the policy 
objectives of the Environmental Protection Agency. Course examines how environmental injustices may arise 
out of discriminatory behavior and/or market forces founded on individual, firm, and government incentives. 
We begin with the theoretical framework used to document and explain disproportionate exposures, then 
review existing empirical evidence through case studies and evaluate competing explanations for injustice 
using an economics framework. Prerequisites: Econ 201D, 205D, 208D. Instructor: Timmins. One course. C-L: 
Environment 332S
433. The Economics of Wages and Employment. EI, QS, R, SS, W Demand for and supply of labor, 
including human fertility, human capital, hours of work, and labor force participation. Effects of family 
structure, marriage laws, taxes and transfers (welfare, earned income tax credit) on labor supply and the 
distribution of income across families and individuals. Labor market discrimination, unions. Prerequisites: 
Economics 205D; and Statistics 111, 130, 230, 250, or Mathematics 230 or 342. Instructor: McElroy or Sloan. 
One course.
434A. Political Economy of Immigration. CCI, SS Two courses. C-L: see Political Science 294A; also C-L: 
Public Policy 355A, Sociology 294A
435S. Economics of Education. SS A course in applied microeconomic policy analysis, focusing on the 
economic factors underlying the historical and current provision of education in the United States. Topics 
of interest include the private and social returns to education; the effect of scholastic inputs on student 
achievement (including teacher quality and class size); the valuation of school quality through house prices; 
and the role of incentives in increasing the efficiency with which education services are delivered. To facilitate 
a deeper understanding of such concepts, key econometric techniques used in empirical research are reviewed. 
Prerequisites: Economics 205D required; Economics 208D strongly recommended. Instructor: Macartney. One 
course.
438. Public Finance. QS, SS Economic aspects of the allocative and distributive role of government in the 
economy, the incidence and efficiency of taxation, the effects of taxation on behavior, and analysis of major 
government spending programs. Prerequisite: Economics 205D or Public Policy Studies 303D. Instructor: 
Serrato or staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 289
442. Development Economics: Theory, Evidence and Policy. CCI, R, SS This course studies the 
past, present and future of economic development. We begin by briefly learning about patterns of economic 
development through time and across countries. We then study a selection of specific development policy 
challenges chosen from conflict, education, health, governance, infrastructure, international aid, labor markets, 
and trade. We emphasize learning the tools that economists use to study economic development: statistical 
analysis of large datasets, economic models, and historical case studies. Prerequisite: Economics 205D, 208D, 
and 210D. Instructor: Garlick. One course.
452. Economic Growth. CCI, R, SS Examination of the enormous differences in living standards across 
countries, which reflect differences in growth experiences. Course studies both analytical foundations of 
modern growth theory and the most recent advances in modeling to shed light on old and new questions about 
such experiences. Not open to students with credit for Economics 352/International Comparative Studies 
356. Prerequisite: Economics 205D, 208D and 210D. Instructor: Peretto. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 452
453. Advanced Econometrics. QS, R, SS This course surveys the formal theory of causality, how to identify 
it from data, and how these methods are used in applied microeconomics and public policy. While causality is 
the focus, the course will also introduce various nonparametric statistical methods as necessary. Prerequisite: 
Economics 208D. Instructor: Masten. One course.
455. International Finance. CCI, SS Analysis of the determinants of international capital movements, trade 
imbalances, and nominal and real exchange rates. Policy debates such as the foreign indebtedness of the United 
States, emerging market debt crises, exchange-rate-based inflation stabilization, and balance-of-payment crises. 
Prerequisites: Economics 372 or 205D and 210D. Instructor: Burnside or staff. One course.
461. How Markets Work: Theory, Evidence and Empirical Tools. QS, R, SS Uses theoretical models 
& empirical tools to understand how markets work and implications for public policy/firm strategy. Introduces 



 Economics (ECON)320

main theoretical models and empirical techniques used to study range of markets, applying these methods 
to understand issues/markets in detail. Topics may include auctions, mergers/antitrust policy, collusion, 
dynamic pricing of new products, price discrimination, insurance markets and advertising. Students will read/
evaluate research papers and complete empirical problem sets, highlighting areas suitable for future research. 
Prerequisites: Economics 208D. Instructor: Roberts. One course.
462. Behavioral Economics. QS, SS Introduction to the insights gained from incorporating psychology 
into economic modeling. Based exclusively on original, often recent, scientific publications. Focus on empirical 
evidence, theoretical models and economic implications. Equilibrium analysis is essential analytical tool. 
Participants will each give a presentation of a scientific paper from the reading list. This course will build on 
mathematics covered in Mathematics 202/212/222. Prerequisite: Economics 205D. Instructor: Sadowski. One 
course.
463. Law and Economics. EI, QS, SS A qualitative and quantitative introduction to economic analysis of 
legal issues and legal reasoning. Case studies in accident law, product liability, and the value of life. Other topics 
include contracts, property, affirmative action, civil procedure, and the economics of criminal behavior. Some 
models examined include a calculus-based approach. Prerequisite: Economics 205D. Instructor: Graham or 
staff. One course.
464. Competitive Strategy and Industrial Organization. QS, SS Foundations of the field of industrial 
organization, including the theory of the firm, models of competition, market structure, pricing and dynamic 
models. Emphasis on theory with support from specific industries, including telecommunications, retail 
and airlines. Prerequisite: Economics 205D. Instructor: Khan or Yildirim. One course. C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
465. Market Power and Public Policy. QS, SS The purpose of antitrust laws is to control how firms 
attain and maintain their market position, presumably for the betterment of consumers, or at least for the 
benefit of society. Using a rigorous set of tools from microeconomic and game theory, this class will investigate 
the underpinnings of policies meant to deal with market power broadly defined, such as antitrust laws, the 
regulation of public utilities, the regulation of financial markets, and anti-dumping rules. Prerequisites: 
Economics 101 or 101D, and 201D and 205D. Instructor: Collard-Wexler. One course. C-L: Public Policy 310
471. Financial Markets and Investment. QS, SS The structure and workings of financial markets. Topics 
include risk-return relationships, aspects of portfolio selection, the capital asset pricing model, the arbitrage 
pricing theory, fixed income analysis, and aspects of derivatives. Prerequisite: Economics 205D or Economics 
372; and Statistical Science 111, 230, 130 or 250, or Mathematics 230 or 342. Instructor: Weller. One course.
471A. Financial Markets and Investments. QS, SS This is a Duke in London course. The structure and 
workings of financial markets. Topics include risk-return relationships, aspects of portfolio selection, the capital 
asset pricing model, the arbitrage pricing theory, fixed income analysis, and aspects of derivatives. Prerequisites: 
Economics 205D or Economics 372; and Statistical Science 111, 230, 130 or 250, or Mathematics 230 or 342. 
Instructor: Rasiel. One course.
472S. Goodner Equity Research Project. R, SS An introduction to the art and science of equity research. 
Using detailed financial statement analysis and other public sources of information to analyze companies. 
Comparables analysis, discounted cash flow, event studies, and outside-the-box ways to find evidence of hidden 
value in companies. Course will include periodic video conference with New York investment manager for 
practical applications. Instructor: Rasiel. One course.
473. Corporate Finance Theory: Governance, Incentives and Valuation. QS, SS Uses tools of 
contract theory (information economics, mechanism design, and game theory) to analyze key features of 
corporate structure, performance, and valuation. Investigates critical interactions among stakeholders in a 
modern business enterprise (directors, executives, management, labor, financiers, shareholders, and regulators) 
in achieving goals and objectives of the corporation. Topics include: reform of corporate governance and 
auditing; role of private equity, financial markets, and takeovers; efficient determination of leverage, dividends, 
liquidity, risk management, and design of managerial incentive packages. Prerequisite: Economics 205D. 
Instructor: Taylor. One course.
474S. The Eichel Asset-Backed Securitization Project. SS, STS Introduction to asset-backed 
securitization market; analysis of risk and return of securitized products as investment tools. History of US 



Economics (ECON) 321

mortgages and securitized products, and factors leading to the credit crisis. Exposition of relevant econometrics 
techniques and risk evaluation models. Students will work on team-based projects in which they identify 
a relevant research question, collect data, and apply robust statistical analysis of their hypothesis. Course 
enhanced by period visiting lectures from alumnus Scott Eichel and colleagues at Barclays to discuss practical 
applications of research. Prerequisite: (Economics 208D or Economics 372) and Mathematics 212. Instructor: 
Kreicher. One course.
476. Empirical Asset Pricing. SS This course develops, examines, and applies models for portfolio decisions 
by investors and the pricing of securities in capital markets. While developing portfolio theory, we will study 
the extensive empirical work that characterizes movements in security prices, evaluates alternative investment 
and asset pricing models, and attempts to test those models and interpret the implications of those tests. This 
is a research oriented course with practical implementation of quantitative methods in finance, aimed at highly 
motivated and technically proficient undergraduate and master’s students. Prerequisite: Economics 372/572 or 
Economics 471/571. Instructor: Weller. One course.
477. Fixed Income Markets and Quantitative Methods. QS Areas of focus include: The value of money 
and discounted cash flow concepts, statistics, probability concepts, correlation & regression, understanding 
risks associated with bonds, and bonds with embedded options, and mortgages and the mortgage markets. 
Prerequisite: Economics 372. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Selected Topics in Economics. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor permission usually an option. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ 
by section. Prerequisite: Economics 205D; check individual semester offerings for additional prerequisites. 
Instructor permission usually an option. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Economics. Topics differ 
by section. Prerequisite: Economics 205D; check individual semester offerings for additional prerequisites. 
Instructor permission usually an option. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Selected Topics in Economics. Seminar version of Economics 490. Prerequisite: Economics 205D; 
check individual semester offerings for additional prerequisites. Instructor permission usually an option. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Honors Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is the production of an honors thesis, containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 
Economics 210D. Consent of instructor and Director of Undergraduate Studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
494. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, containing significant quantitative analysis and interpretation of a previously approved 
topic. Department consent required. Prerequisite: Economics 205D and 210D. Instructor: Fullenkamp. One 
course.
495S. Honors Seminar I. R, SS, W First course in two-semester honors sequence. Guided research on 
student-selected topics. Iterative presentations and writing assignments on current literature related to student-
selected topics and of student-developed research proposals. Course requires completion of research proposal 
suitable for write-up as honors thesis in Economics 496S. Prerequisites: Economics 205D, 208D and 210D. 
Instructor: Connolly, Kim, Kimbrough, or Staff. One course.
496S. Honors Seminar II. R, SS, W Following Economics 495S, iterative forum for conducting original 
research culminating in a substantive research project suitable for submission as an honors thesis. Prerequisites: 
Economics 205D and 210D. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Connolly, Kim, Kimbrough, or staff. One 
course.
502S. Law, Economics, and Organizations. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 602S
503S. Microeconomics of International Development Policy. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 
603S
505. International Trade and Policy. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 605



 Economics (ECON)322

506. Macroeconomic Policy and International Finance. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 606
507. The Uses of Economics. The various ways economics is used in contemporary society: in the scholarly 
community, government, private sector, civil society, other disciplines, and popular culture. Readings in original 
texts and interpretative commentaries. Combined with Economics 311, this course may yield a written product 
suitable for submission for graduation with distinction. Graduate pairing for Econ 313; graduate students will 
receive additional writing assignments. Instructor: Staff. One course.
511. History of Economic Thought. Approaches to economic problems from Aristotle to Keynes, 
emphasizing certain models and doctrines—their origins, relevance, and evolution. Readings from Mun, 
Quesnay, Adam Smith, Malthus, Ricardo, Marx, Walras, Veblen, and Keynes. Graduate version of Economics 
313; graduate students will receive additional writing assignments. Instructor: Medema. One course.
512. Equity Valuation and Financial Statement Analysis. High-level course for those who have 
previously had experience in corporate finance and accounting. Designed to give the student a deeper insight 
into important concepts relating to equity valuation and financial statement analysis, including such topics 
as international standards conversion, tax implications, long term liabilities and leases, and employee 
compensation. Prerequisites: Economics 174, and either Economics 372 or Economics 373. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
513. Structuring Venture Capital and Private Equity Transactions. Design and implementation 
of corporate merger and acquisition transactions, including acquisitions of stock and assets of non-public 
corporations and acquisitions of publicly-held corporations in negotiated and hostile transactions. Covers 
federal securities law and state corporate law issues, including important forms of private ordering, such as 
poison pills, lock-ups, earn outs and the allocation of risks by the acquisition agreement. Relevant accounting, 
tax and antitrust issues and various regulatory considerations will also be covered. Prerequisites: Economics 
174, and either Economics 372 or Economics 373. Instructor: Staff. One course.
515. Introduction to Law & Economics. One course. C-L: see Law 359
521. Evaluation of Public Expenditures. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 596; also C-L: Environment 
532
521D. Evaluation of Public Expenditures. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 596D; also C-L: 
Environment 532D
522S. Seminar in Applied Project Evaluation. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 597S
523. Microfinance. Microfinancing, in which small loans are given to those who are impoverished/lack 
collateral, has been credited for alleviating poverty/raising the incomes of millions of people in developing 
countries. Is it really so successful? Course focuses on historical/theoretical basis of microfinance. Students 
engage in a critical assessment of microfinance. Overall, students gain factual/historical information concerning 
the “microfinance revolution”, learn the basic theoretical/analytical tools needed to design microfinance 
programs, and engage in critical thinking regarding recent debates in the field. Graduate pairing for Econ 323; 
graduate students will receive additional writing assignments. Instructor: Staff. One course.
527. Regulation and Deregulation in Public Utilities. Class explores historical basis for regulation of 
public utilities from an economic/legal perspective. Application of standard monopoly microeconomics leading 
to rate of return regulation is developed. This background sets stage for evolution of economic thought on 
electric power system economics and changes in some states, to “deregulate,” the electricity markets. Class will 
explore case studies of developments in these markets, including evolution of regional market clearing entities 
like PJM, the basis for location marginal pricing, measures of market power, and pricing of capacity/reliability. 
Graduate pairing for Econ 328; graduate students will receive additional writing assignments. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
529S. Medical Malpractice. Seminar will focus on each of four medical malpractice “system” markets. 
Students will write a term paper on one aspect of one market. A book will be assigned and readings from journal 
articles. The seminar will be of interest to anyone who wants to learn more about medical malpractice, tort, 
how legal markets and insurance operate, and the political economy of “tort reform.” Graduate pairing for Econ 
329S; graduate students will receive additional writing assignments. Instructor: Staff. One course.
530. Resource & Environmental Economics I. SS C-L: see Environment 520; also C-L: Public Policy 576, 



Economics (ECON) 323

Energy 520, Marine Science and Conservation
530D. Resource and Environmental Economics and Policy. One course. C-L: see Environment 520D; 
also C-L: Public Policy 575D
530L. Resource and Environmental Economics. One course. C-L: see Environment 520L; also C-L: 
Public Policy 575L, Marine Science and Conservation
531. Resource & Environmental Economics II. SS Variable credit. C-L: see Environment 521; also C-L: 
Public Policy 584
541S. Global Inequality Research Seminar. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 645S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 642S, Sociology 642S, Political Science 642S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 642S, Human Rights
542S. Social Change, Markets, and Economy in China. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 651S
544S. Computer Modeling. Introduction to the use of computer techniques in economic policy evaluation; 
policy applications to international economics, public finance and development economics; computer analysis 
of linearized and nonlinear models using Excel and GAMS. Students required to complete a major modeling 
project. Graduate pairing for Econ 344S; graduate students will receive additional writing assignments. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
547S. Economy, Society, and Morality in Eighteenth-Century Thought. R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Political Science 675S
548S. Political Economy of Growth, Stabilization and Distribution. R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Political Science 645S
550S. Global Responses to the Rise of China. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 570S
553. Labor Economics. Demand for and supply of labor, including human fertility, human capital, hours 
of work, and labor force participation. Effects of family structure, marriage laws, taxes and transfers (welfare, 
earned income tax credit) on labor supply and the distribution of income across families and individuals. Labor 
market discrimination, unions, Background in microeconomics and econometrics recommended. Similar to 
Economics 433, but intended for MA students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
554. Urban Economics. EI, R, SS, W Introduction to urban and spatial economics. Neoclassical 
monocentric city spatial model, patterns of land values, property prices, residential density and impact of 
distressed communities on broader development. Systems of cities and regional growth, role of cities in 
economic development. United States urban features: ethical and socio-economic effects of housing segregation 
and implications for discrimination. Tradeoffs between efficiency and fairness in housing resource allocation. 
Business location theory, impact of innovations in transportation, and technology’s effect on work patterns. 
Same as Economics 345, but requires additional work. Not open to students who have taken Economics 345. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
555S. International Trade. R, SS International trade, investment and migration, commercial policy, and the 
political economy of trade. Prerequisite: Economics 205D; and Economics 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
557S. International Macroeconomics. Analysis of the determinants of international capital movements, 
trade imbalances, and nominal and real exchange rates. Policy debates such as the foreign indebtedness of the 
United States, emerging market debt crises, exchange-rate-based inflation stabilization, and balance-of-payment 
crises. Same as Economics 455 but with additional work. This course is not open to students who have taken 
Economics 455. Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
561. African Economic Development. Same as undergraduate course of the same name but requires an 
additional paper. This course will seek to provide students with a realistic picture of African economies and 
societies today, emphasizing their heterogeneity and accomplishments, as well as focusing on reasons for 
continued widespread poverty throughout the continent. The course develops behavioral models that can be 
used to explain and predict household, market, and government behaviors and outcomes. Students are expected 
to quickly acquire basic stylized facts and economic models, and then analyze one of the many data sets now 
available. Instructor: Staff. One course.
564. Competitive Strategy and Industrial Organization. QS, SS Foundations of the field of industrial 



 Economics (ECON)324

organization, including the theory of the firm, models of competition, market structure, pricing and dynamic 
models. Emphasis on theory with support from specific industries, including telecommunications, retail and 
airlines. Similar to Economics 464, but requires additional assignment. Not open to students who have taken 
Economics 464. Instructor: Staff. One course.
567S. Computer Modeling. QS, R, SS, W Introduction to the use of computer techniques in economic 
policy evaluation; policy applications to international economics, public finance and development economics; 
computer analysis of linearized and nonlinear models using Excel and GAMS. Students required to complete a 
major modeling project. Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
568S. Current Issues in International and Development Economics. SS, W Issues of income 
distribution within and between countries, vehicles for growth, regional development, the role of politics in 
economic policy, multinational institutions. Cross-country and cross-time comparisons. Emphasis on individual 
research projects. Prerequisite: Economics 205D and Economics 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 512S
570. International Finance. Analysis of the determinants of international capital movements, trade 
imbalances, and nominal and real exchange rates. Policy debates such as the foreign indebtedness of the United 
States, emerging market debt crises, exchange-rate-based inflation stabilization, and balance-of-payment crises. 
Graduate pairing for Econ 455; graduate students will receive additional writing assignments. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
571. Financial Markets and Investments. QS, R Same as Economics 471, but requires an additional 
paper. Prerequisite: Economics 205D; Economics 210D; and Statistical Science 101, 111, 230,130 or 250, or 
Mathematics 230 or 342. Instructor: Weller or staff. One course.
572. Asset Pricing & Risk Management. Integrates micro and macro economics with topics in finance. 
Utility maximization within mean variance framework for portfolio analysis and capital asset pricing model. 
Corporate valuation and discounted cash flow analysis. Capital structure and principal-agent problem will lead 
into a discussion of the Efficient Markets Hypothesis and underlying assumptions. Market pricing, forecasting, 
and financial crises. Graduate pairing for Economics 372; graduate students will receive additional writing 
assignments. Prerequisite: Economics 101 (or Economics 21 and Economics 22); Statistical Science 111, 130, 
230, 210, or 250, or BME 244L; and Economics 205D or Mathematics 212. Instructor: Staff. One course.
580. Law and Economics. A qualitative and quantitative introduction to economic analysis of legal issues 
and legal reasoning. Case studies in accident law, product liability, and the value of life. Other topics include 
contracts, property, affirmative action, civil procedure, and the economics of criminal behavior. Some models 
examined include a calculus-based approach. Graduate pairing for Econ 463; graduate students will receive 
additional writing assignments. Instructor: Staff. One course.
581. Investment Strategies. SS Course examines issues in personal investment strategies. Topics include 
behavioral finance, closed-end and open-end mutual funds, data-mining, diversification, efficient market 
hypothesis, equity premium, exchange-traded funds, expenses and transaction costs, life cycle investing, market 
timing, passive versus active investing, survivorship bias, tax managed investing, time zone arbitrage, Robert 
Shiller’s CAPE, Tobin’s Q.Prerequisite: Economics 201D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590. Selected Topics in Economics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Selected Topics in Economics. Seminar version of Economics 590. One course.
591. Independent Study. Individual non-research, directed reading, or individual project in a field of special 
interest under the supervision of a faculty member. Consent of instructor and director of graduate studies or MA 
program director required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
593. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of graduate studies 
or MA program director required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
597. Economic Science Studies. SS, STS Application of techniques of science and technology studies to 
problems in the history, philosophy, methodology and sociology of economics. Addresses modern economics 
as a illustrative case of issues arising in Studies of Scientific Knowledge. What counts as “fact” in economics? 



Economics (ECON) 325

Who decides, and by what processes of negotiation? Does accepting that knowledge in economics as a construct 
reduce the usefulness of that knowledge and affect the notion of progress in economic science? Why has 
mathematical economics enjoyed such success in recent decades? Close readings in texts across the sciences and 
in modern economics, and the history of mathematics, culminating in a research project. (Similar in context to 
Economics 318S, but requires an additional assignment. Not open to students who have taken Economics 318S) 
Prerequisites: Economics 205D; and Economics 210D or 248; and consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
601D. Microeconomics. QS, SS Topics include theory of consumer choice, demand, uncertainty, competitive 
and imperfectly competitive firms, factor markets, producer theory, and general equilibrium. Intended for 
master’s students. Prerequisites: Intermediate microeconomics and multivariate calculus necessary. Matrix 
algebra and differential equations useful. Instructor: Staff. One course.
602. Macroeconomic Theory. Micro-founded dynamic general equilibrium models have become the 
standard tool for macroeconomic analysis. Course provides guidance on how to work with these models. Our 
baseline New Keynesian model will feature sticky prices combined with monopolistic competition. We will 
show that the result in framework is appealing from an empirical point of view and we will use it to assess 
the desirability of alternative arrangements for the conduct of monetary policy. Prerequisite: Economics 601. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
606. Advanced Macroeconomics II. This course will briefly introduce you to some of the most widely used 
core models of modern macroeconomics. At the same time, it will provide a strong theoretical and practical 
background that can be helpful if you want to pursue further studies in (macro-)economics. In particular, we will 
build, step-by-step, one of the standard workhorses to study the business cycles, the real business cycles (RBC) 
model. We will start from its ancestor, the Solow growth model, we will pass by its origins, the deterministic 
neoclassical growth model, and we will work all the way up to its current dynamic stochastic general equilibrium 
(DSGE) model version. Instructor: Staff. One course.
608D. Introduction to Econometrics. QS, R Data collection, estimation, and hypothesis testing. Use of 
econometric models for analysis and policy. (Same as Economics 208D but requires additional term paper; not 
open to students who have taken Economics 208D.) Economics MA’s only. All other students require permission 
number. Prerequisites: Economics 21 and 22 or 201D; Mathematics 212 (co-requisite); Statistical Science 101, 
111, 230, 130 or 250, or Mathematics 230 or 342. Instructor: Staff. One course.
612. Time Series Econometrics. SS Empirical research in macroeconomics and international finance, 
providing students with a series of econometric tools for empirical analysis of time-series and an introduction 
to the current empirical research in macroeconomics, international finance, and forecasting. Small project 
and simple empirical research required. Prerequisites: Satisfactory performance (as judged by the instructor) 
in Econometrics (Economics 208D) plus a course in Linear Algebra or consent of the instructor. A course in 
macroeconomics (Economics 210D) is very useful but not strictly enforced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
613. Applied Econometrics in Microeconomics. QS, R, SS Empirical research in microeconomics, 
with emphasis on three main sub-fields: labor economics, public economics, and industrial organization. 
Focus on current empirical research in these areas and student independent analysis of current research using 
statistical software. Same as Economics 411, but additional work required. Not open to students who have taken 
Economics 411. Prerequisite: Economics 208D or 608D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
620. Game Theory with Applications of Economics and other Social Sciences. SS Game theory 
is a way of thinking about strategic situations. On one hand its content is normative: it provides guidelines 
for decision makers to predict others’ actions and to recognize good and bad strategies. On the other hand 
its content is positive: it helps the social scientist to understand the nature of social interaction in various 
applications, in economics, political science, sociology and anthropology. We will learn new concepts, methods 
and terminology. Course will emphasize examples and applications. We will also play some games in class. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
621. Non-Market Valuation. This course will cover non-market valuation techniques typically used to 
measure the value of local public goods and (dis)amenities. These techniques are used to determine the 
“benefits” side in a cost-benefit analysis, and are central to the formulation of regulatory policy in the US. In 
addition, they play an important role in local public finance, urban, and environmental economic analysis. 
Papers will be both theoretical and applied. Applications will focus on questions in public finance, as well as 



 Economics (ECON)326

urban and environmental economics, with a strong focus on the latter. MA Micro Theory is recommended. 
Instructor: Timmins. One course.
623. Forecasting Financial Markets. Introduces statistical models for financial price and risk. ARMA, 
GARCH, Value-at-Risk. Covers both theory underlying these models and practical implementation using 
statistical software (MATLAB). Prerequisite: Economics 608D or 672. Instructor: Patton. One course.
624. International Trade. This is a semester-long course in international trade. The objective of the course 
is to introduce students to current research topics on international trade as well as the tools and methodologies 
that are prevalent in the field. Instructor: Dix-Carneiro and Xu. One course.
627. Soviet and Post-Soviet Economic History. CCI, CZ, SS, W This course traces economic factors 
leading to the downfall of the Russian Empire and the rise of the USSR, followed by an assessment of the 
collapse of the USSR. Particular attention is devoted to the NEP period, earlier Soviet economic models, the 
famine of the 1930s, the impact of the Great Patriotic War (WWII), industrialization and urbanization, Soviet 
planning, and declining productivity growth and life expectancy in the in the 1970s and 1980s. The course then 
explores the economic consequences of the USSR’s collapse as well as the nature of recovery in various countries 
that followed. Prerequisite: Economics 201D and (Economics 208D or 204D, either of which can be taken 
concurrently). Instructor: Becker. One course. C-L: History 627, Russian 627
650. Labor Economics. SS The goal of this class is to acquaint students with topics in labor economics. After 
reviewing basic facts about labor markets around the world (participation rates, unemployment, wages, etc.), 
we will cover theories of labor supply, labor demand, wages, and human capital. Additional topics include wage 
discrimination, unemployment, and labor market policies. There will an emphasis on the interplay between 
theory and empirical exercises. Instructor: Staff. One course.
656S. International Monetary Economics. R, SS Financial aspects of growth and income determination, 
and macroeconomic policy in open economies. Applications to exchange rate determination, capital markets, 
fluctuations in the trade balance and current account, monetary and fiscal policies in open economies, currency 
crises, and monetary reform. Significant research component required. Economics MA students only. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
664. Industrial Organization. QS This class provides a graduate level introduction to Industrial 
Organization, covering theoretical and empirical work dealing with the structure, behavior, and performance 
of firms and markets. There will be more focus on empirical methods and applications. Topics include the 
organization of the firm, monopoly, price discrimination, oligopoly, auctions, vertical market structures, market 
entry. The course integrates theoretical models and empirical studies. It also presumes that students have a 
familiarity with intro micro theory, some basic game theory and some econometrics. Prerequisites: Economics 
205, Econ 208, Econ 601. Instructor: Staff. One course.
665. Market Power and Public Policy. The purpose of antitrust laws is to control how firms attain and 
maintain their market position, presumably for the betterment of consumers, or at least for the benefit of 
society. Using a rigorous set of tools from microeconomic and game theory, this class will investigate the 
underpinnings of policies meant to deal with market power broadly defined, such as antitrust laws, the 
regulation of public utilities, the regulation of financial markets, and anti-dumping rules. The graduate section 
of this class will have additional assignments doing structural evaluation of mergers. This will involve a 
combination of estimation techniques and computational work for merger simulations. Prerequisite: Economics 
608D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
667. Computer Modeling. QS, R, SS, W Introduction to the use of computer techniques in economic 
policy evaluation; policy applications to international economics, public finance and development economics; 
computer analysis of linearized and nonlinear models using Excel and GAMS. Students required to complete a 
major modeling project. Prerequisites: Economics 205D and 210D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
671. Financial Markets and Investments. The structure and workings of financial markets. Topics include 
risk-return relationships, portfolio selection, the capital asset pricing model, the arbitrage pricing theory, fixed 
income analysis, and aspects of derivatives. This is an advanced version of Economics 571 intended primarily 
for students in the Master’s in Quantitative Financial Economics program. It employs a more mathematically 
rigorous and theoretically advanced approach than Economics 471 and 571. Instructor: Staff. One course.
672. Empirical Methods in High Frequency Financial Econometrics. Focus is on understanding and 



Economics (ECON) 327

applying principal results with emphasis on substantive applications. Topics generally include jump diffusions, 
semi-martingales, jump-robust volatility estimation, realized beta, jump regressions, local volatility estimation, 
diffusive beta, and measurement error (noise). Instructor: Staff. One course.
673. Mathematical Finance. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 581
674. Financial Derivatives. One course. C-L: see Mathematics 582
675. Corporate Finance Theory: Governance, Incentives and Valuation. QS, SS Course uses tools 
of contract theory (information economics, mechanism design, and game theory) to analyze key features of 
corporate structure, performance, and valuation. Investigates critical interactions among stakeholders in a 
modern business enterprise (directors, executives, management, labor, financiers, shareholders, and regulators) 
in achieving goals and objectives of the corporation. Topics include: reform of corporate governance and 
auditing; role of private equity, financial markets, and takeovers; efficient determination of leverage, dividends, 
liquidity, and risk management, and design of managerial incentive packages. Prerequisite: Economics 205D. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
676. Empirical Asset Pricing. SS This course develops, examines, and applies models for portfolio decisions 
by investors and the pricing of securities in capital markets. While developing portfolio theory, we will study 
the extensive empirical work that characterizes movements in security prices, evaluates alternative investment 
and asset pricing models, and attempts to test those models and interpret the implications of those tests. This 
is a research-oriented course with practical implementation of quantitative methods in finance, aimed at highly 
motivated and technically proficient undergraduate and master’s students. Prerequisite: Economics 372 or 572 
or 471 or 571. Instructor: Staff. One course.
677. Fixed Income Markets and Quantitative Methods. QS The areas of focus will include: the 
value of money and discounted cash flow concepts, statistics, probability concepts, correlation & regression, 
understanding risks associated with bonds, and bonds with embedded options, and mortgages and the mortgage 
markets. Prerequisite: Economics 372. Instructor: Staff. One course.
678. Derivatives for Speculation and Risk Management. A rigorous introduction to financial derivatives 
focused on their use for hedging/risk management, establishing trades to reflect market outlooks and a means to 
create leverage. Students will learn theoretical underpinnings of derivative products and understand advantages 
and pitfalls they offer for traders and hedgers. Topics include: basics of bond and swap valuation, difference 
and overlap of forwards and futures, use and pricing of basic and exotic options, Black-Scholes-Merton formula, 
Value-at-Risk (VAR). Emphasis on markets-based implementation of technical material and real world 
examples of market disruption. Recommended prerequisite: Economics 608D or equivalent; multivariable 
calculus. Instructor: Leven. One course.
690. Selected Topics in Economics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-82. Topics in Mathematical Finance. One course. C-L: see Mathematics 690-82
690S. Selected Topics in Economics. Seminar version of Economics 690. Instructor: Staff. One course.
699. Internship. Open to students engaging in practical or governmental work experience during the summer 
or a regular semester. A faculty member in the department will supervise a program of study related to the work 
experience, including a substantive paper on an economics-related topic, maintaining significant analysis and 
interpretation. Consent of director of graduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

The Major
The undergraduate degree in economics signifies achievement of proficiency in quantitative skills and 

experience in applying these to economics. 

For the AB Degree
Prerequisites: Mathematics 122 or 112L and 202; or 212, or 222, or any higher-level mathematics course 

with Mathematics 212 as a prerequisite. Economics 104D. Economics 104D is a prerequisite for Economics 204D 
and many other 300/400-level economics courses and therefore should be taken by the fall of sophomore year. 
Prerequisites for the major, as well as requirements, may not be taken Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory, with the 
exception of Economics 101.



 Economics (ECON)328

Requirements: Five core courses: (Economics 21 and 22; Economics 23 and 24; or Economics 101), 
Economics 201D, Economics 204D, Economics 205D, and Economics 210D. Students are encouraged to complete 
these classes no later than the spring of their sophomore year and Economics 204D must be taken before their 
senior year. Five electives chosen from economics courses at the 300 level or above with at least one course at the 
300 level and at least one course at the 400 level. Courses 500-549 can only be counted toward the major with the 
approval of the director of undergraduate studies. For students entering in Fall 2002 or later, at least one of these 
five courses must be in either economic history or the history, philosophy, or sociology of economics (Economics 
344, Economics 322SA, Economics 302/History 306, Economics 319/Philosophy 345, Economics 304/History 
310, Economics 312/History 308, Economics 311/History 307, Economics 313, Economics 314, Economics 316S 
or Economics 318S, Economics 222D, or other courses with the approval of the director of undergraduate studies). 

Substitution of similar courses in other departments at Duke for courses in the Department of Economics 
used toward major requirements is not permitted. A maximum of two transfer and/or study abroad credits may 
be counted toward major requirements. (The only exception applies to study abroad credit from the full year 
program at the London School of Economics, from which a maximum of four transfer and/or study abroad credits 
may be counted toward major requirements.) Transfer credits are not permitted for Economics 104D, 204D, 
205D, or 210D.

For the BS Degree
Students who contemplate graduate study in economics are urged to develop skills in intermediate calculus 

(Mathematics 212), linear algebra (Mathematics 221), differential equations (Mathematics 356), and advanced 
calculus (Mathematics 431).

Prerequisites: Mathematics 122 or 122L and 202; or 212, or 222 or any higher-level mathematics course 
with Mathematics 212 as a prerequisite. Economics 104D. Economics 104D is a prerequisite for Economics 
204D and many 300/400-level economics courses and therefore should be taken by the fall of sophomore year. 
Prerequisites for the major, as well as requirements, may not be taken Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory, with the 
exception of Economics 101.

Requirements: Five core courses: Economics 21 and 22; Economics 23 and 24; or Economics 101. 
Economics 201D. Economics 204D, Economics 205D, and Economics 210D. Students are encouraged to complete 
these classes no later than the spring of their sophomore year, and Economics 204D must be taken before their 
senior year. Five electives chosen from any economics courses at the 300 level or above with at least one course 
at the 300 level and one course at the 400 level. Courses 500-549 can only be counted toward the major with the 
approval of the director of undergraduate studies. 

Substitution of similar courses in other departments at Duke for courses in the Department of Economics 
used toward major requirements is not permitted. A maximum of two transfer and/or study abroad credits may 
be counted toward major requirements. (The only exception applies to study abroad credit from the full year 
program at the London School of Economics, from which a maximum of four transfer and/or study abroad credits 
may be counted toward major requirements.) Transfer credits are not permitted for 104D, 204D, 205D, or 210D.

For the BS Degree with Concentration in Financial Economics
The economics department also offers a BS degree with a concentration in financial economics. Certification 

of this concentration is designated on the official transcript. Students who wish to pursue this designation must 
complete the requirements for the BS degree with the addition of the following requirements. 

Requirements: Economics 372 (Intermediate Finance). Three electives chosen from among the following 
economics courses: Economics 305S, 307A, 333, 353, 368, 370/370A, 373, 377/377A, 378, 379, 381S, 382, 413, 455, 
461, 471, 476, 477, 512, 581, Economics 673/Mathematics 581, Economics 674/Mathematics 582, Mathematics 
381K, Energy 620, Biomedical Engineering 385, select special topics courses with number Economics 390, 490, or 
590, and others with approval of the director of undergraduate studies. Students graduating with a concentration 
in financial economics may not include Economics 372 as one of the five electives required for the BS degree in 
economics.

The Department of Economics maintains online resources to guide economics majors and minors at 
https://econ.duke.edu/undergraduate.

https://econ.duke.edu/undergraduate


Economics (ECON) 329

Departmental Graduation with Distinction

Awarding of Distinction
A student will be awarded distinction upon graduation if he/she has satisfied all of the following 

requirements:
• A minimum grade point average of 3.3 in the major and 3.3 overall;
• Completion of five electives commensurate with an undergraduate AB or BS degree; and
• The honors committee determines if the honors thesis qualifies for Graduation with Distinction. 

Awarding of High Distinction
A student will be awarded High Distinction upon graduation if he/she has satisfied all of the requirements 

for Distinction and his/her honors thesis is selected by our honors committee from among nominated theses.

Awarding of Research Distinction
In recognition of the strong independent research dimension required of a successful honors thesis, a student 

will be awarded Research Distinction upon graduation if the honors committee determines his/her thesis qualifies 
for Graduation with Distinction regardless of whether or not the student meets the university and departmental 
GPA standards for Graduation with Distinction. These students will be recognized in the departmental graduation 
program.

Paths to the Honors Thesis
An honors thesis is a research paper completed during the senior year of the economics major. It represents 

a degree of research and critical thinking sufficiently complex and sophisticated as to require two to three 
semesters’ worth of work. The thesis is planned, researched, drafted, and revised over the course of two to three 
semesters, using research tools and techniques commensurate with an undergraduate BS degree. 

To be considered for Graduation with Distinction in economics, students must pursue one of two paths 
outlined below. 

• Path 1: Honors Workshop Courses: The best setting in which to foster the research process is a 
two-semester workshop, resembling graduate workshops. In a workshop setting, students meet with 
their professor(s) and each other to observe advanced research (professors from outside the university, 
Duke economics graduate students, and Duke economics professors present their own research to the 
students), and then, in turn, develop and later present their own research on a regular biweekly basis, 
continually receiving feedback from their peers and from professors and graduate students. 
The department offers a two-semester research workshop sequences for students interested in writing 
an honors thesis: Economics 495S (Honors Seminar I) and Economics 496S (Honors Seminar II). 
Students do not necessarily have to qualify for Graduation with Distinction in order to enroll in these 
research workshop sequences, nor will completion of either sequence guarantee Graduation with 
Distinction. The honors committee will determine if the honors thesis qualifies for Graduation with 
Distinction. Note: Should a problem arise that prevents a student from completing this sequence, they 
can switch to Path 2 described below.  
Students who follow Path 1 may begin as early as the spring semester of their junior year. Davies 
Fellowships are available to sponsor some of these juniors (and their mentors) to enable them to do 
research full-time under the supervision of their advisor during the summer between their junior and 
senior years.

• Path 2: Independent Study Courses: Students choosing this path enroll in Economics 394 
(Research Independent Study) in either the spring of their junior year or the fall of their senior year, 
under the instruction of the mentoring faculty member. In the following semester (or in a subsequent 
semester), the student enrolls in an Economics 493 (Honors Research Independent Study) and 
completes the thesis. For the independent study courses (Economics 394 and Economics 493), 
students must enlist the approval of a specific faculty member (through submission of an approval form 
to the director of undergraduate studies) indicating that the faculty member is willing to work with the 
student for an entire academic year in an independent study format to produce an honors thesis. The 
honors committee will determine if the honors thesis qualifies for Graduation with Distinction. 
Students who start on Path 2 may switch to Path 1 by enrolling in Economics 496S (Honors Seminar II) 
with the signature of their faculty mentor and the approval of the 496S instructor (which is gained by 
submission of a satisfactory thesis proposal). 



  Education (EDUC)330

The Minor
Requirements: Economics 21 and 22; Economics 23 and 24; or Economics 101. Economics 201D. Three 

additional economics courses, of which no more than one course may be at the 200 level other than Economics 
Economics 204D, 205, and 210, which may all be counted toward the minor; and two courses at the 300 level or 
higher. Courses 500-549 can only be counted toward the minor with the approval of the director of undergraduate 
studies. Substitution of similar courses in other departments at Duke for courses in the Department of Economics 
used toward minor requirements is not permitted.

Minor in Financial Economics
Requirements: Economics 21 and 22; Economics 23 and 24; or Economics 101. Economics 104D or 

Statistical Science 111 or Statistical Science 112FS or Statistical Science 130 or Statistical Science 210; or Statistical 
Science 230/Mathematics 230, or Statistical Science 250/Mathematics 342D, or Biomedical Engineering 244L 
Mathematics 222 or Mathematics 216; or Mathematics 212. Economics 372. Three electives to be selected from 
among the following: Economics 305S, 307A, 333, 353, 368, 370/370A, 373, 377/377A, 378, 379, 381S, 382, 413, 
455, 461, 471, 476, 477, 512, 581, Economics 673/Mathematics 581, Economics 674/Mathematics 582, Mathematics 
381K, Energy 620, Biomedical Engineering 385, select special topics courses with number Economics 390, 490, 
or 590, and others with approval of the director of undergraduate studies.

Education
Associate Professor of the Practice Wynn, Director of the Program; Professor of the Practice Malone, Director 
of Undergraduate Studies; Professor of the Practice Riggsbee; Associate Professor of the Practice Stephens; As-
sistant Professors of the Practice Anderson and Smith; Instructors Carboni, Daniels, and McDonald; University 
Distinguished Service Professor Emeritus O’Barr; Associate Professor of the Practice Emeritus Jentleson; Affil-
iated Faculty: Adjunct Associate Professors Airall and Teasley; Adjunct Assistant Professor Morrison; Adjunct 
Instructors Chin, Fierro, Goldwasser, Hollowell, Hunter Twietmeyer, Miglarese, and Smith

A minor, but not a major, is available in this department. 

Courses in Education (EDUC)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Social and Philosophical Foundations of Education. CCI, EI, SS Interdisciplinary examination 
of issues confronting American education, incorporating historical, political, economical, philosophical, and 
social perspectives. Exploration of ways cultural influences and differences have shaped public schools. Students 
participate in structured service learning experience in which they reflect on ethical issues related to schooling. 
Required participation in service-learning. Instructor: Anderson, Smith, or Daniels. One course. C-L: Ethics 
Elective
101S. Social and Philosophical Foundations of Education. CCI, EI, SS Interdisciplinary examination 
of issues confronting American education, incorporating historical, political, economical, philosophical, and 
social perspectives. Exploration of ways cultural influences and differences have shaped public schools. Students 
participate in structured service-learning experience in which they reflect on ethical issues related to schooling. 
Required participation in service-learning. Instructor: Wynn or Daniels. One course.
111FS. Pursuit of Equality: Rethinking Schools - Lens of Social Justice. CCI, EI, SS In 1954 the 
Supreme Court case Brown versus the Board of Education forever changed American schools by ending 
segregation and creating educational equity. Or did it? Are today’s schools any more inclusive or socially just 
than schools were 50 years ago? Examination of ways schools may or may not perpetuate and reproduce 
social inequities. Focus on recent efforts to imagine and create socially-just schools. Discussion of our ethical 
responsibilities as civically engaged citizens to work towards educational equality and provide support of 
schools that are inclusive, culturally responsive, and democratic. Required service-learning experience working 
with children in a Durham public school. Instructor: Malone and Riggsbee. One course. C-L: Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 111FS, Human Rights
112FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI Study of medical ethics, 



 Education (EDUC) 331

policy, clinical, and personal issues in working with dying and bereaved people. Focuses on diverse populations 
in ethnicity, culture, socioeconomic status, education, sexual orientation, and more. Various models for 
providing care to the dying and bereaved. Visits from medical personnel. Works to be read/viewed may include 
“Me, Earl, and the Dying Girl,” Charon’s “Narrative Medicine,” Gawande’s “Being Mortal,” Tolstoy’s “Death of 
Ivan Ilich,” Kalanithi’s “When Breath Becomes Air,” and policy articles on end of life care and physician assisted 
suicide. Focus Program students only. Service-Learning course. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Gheith. 
One course. C-L: Public Policy 183FS, Russian 121FS, Science & Society 112FS, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 112FS, Human Rights
113FS. Enterprising Leadership and Civic Engagement. EI, SS An exploration of ways that students 
can exercise enterprising leadership to develop innovative, resourceful solutions to important civic issues 
within and external to Duke University. Course includes four primary focuses: understanding models of change, 
exploring and practicing enterprising leadership behaviors, reflecting upon ethical values, and designing and 
implementing a civic engagement project on campus. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Bergene. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 113FS, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 113FS, Human Rights
190S. Special Topics. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Introduction to key concepts, theories, and critiques of civic engagement and social change, with a focus on 
competing notions of democratic citizenship. Examination of voluntarism, philanthropy, community service, 
political participation, social activism and other forms of community engagement. Critical reflection on ethical 
issues related to community engagement and social change, including critiques of progressivism and service. 
Students will also be asked to apply these various approaches to pressing social issues of our time, such as 
income inequality, environmental justice, education reform and gender and race equality. Instructor: Mlyn. One 
course. C-L: Civic Engagement and Social Change 201, Public Policy 203, Political Science 213, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 201
201S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Introduction to key concepts, theories, and critiques of civic engagement and social change, with a focus on 
competing notions of democratic citizenship. Examination of voluntarism, philanthropy, community service, 
political participation, social activism and other forms of community engagement. Critical reflection on ethical 
issues related to community engagement and social change, including critiques of progressivism and service. 
Students will also be asked to apply these various approaches to pressing social issues of our time, such as 
income inequality, environmental justice, education reform and gender and race equality. Consent of instructor 
is required. Instructor: Mlyn. One course. C-L: Civic Engagement and Social Change 201S, Public Policy 206S, 
Political Science 213S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 201S, Human Rights
209FS. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, EI One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 209FS; also C-L: Visual Arts 212FS, Visual and Media Studies 212FS
209S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth. ALP, EI One course. 
C-L: see Documentary Studies 209S; also C-L: Visual Arts 212S, Visual and Media Studies 212S, Information 
Science + Studies
220. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick. CCI, EI, R, SS Exploration of historic and 
contemporary psycho-social and socio-cultural aspects of the African American sport experience. Examination 
of research that addresses the effect of physical differences, racial stereotyping, identity development, gender 
issues, and social influences on African American sport participation patterns. Analysis of sport as a microcosm 
of society with an emphasis on examining associated educational and societal issues. Instructor: Smith. 
One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 232, Sociology 202, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 221, Human Rights
234S. Anthropology and Education. CCI, EI, SS Exploration of different conceptions of culture and the 
importance of employing cultural lenses to examine the process of education. Investigation, in particular, of the 
impact of culture and issues of race, class and gender in American schools. Instructor: Airall. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 234S
239. Marxism and Society. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 380; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 



  Education (EDUC)332

203, Sociology 339, Political Science 371, International Comparative Studies, Marxism and Society
240. Educational Psychology. CCI, EI, SS Principles of developmental, social, and cognitive psychology as 
applied to education, with a focus on how children learn. Examination of the impact on learning of race, class, 
gender, and ethnicity, including a comparative analysis of cultural differences in American schools. Through 
structured service-learning experiences in local schools, students reflect through writing on ethical issues in 
teaching. Required service-learning. Instructor: Malone or Daniels. One course. C-L: Psychology 240, Child 
Policy Research, Ethics Elective
240-1. Educational Psychology. CCI, EI, SS Principles of developmental, social, and cognitive psychology 
as applied to education, with a focus on how children learn. Examination of the impact on learning of race, class, 
gender, and ethnicity, including a comparative analysis of cultural differences in American schools. Through 
structured service learning experiences in local schools, students reflect through writing on ethical issues in 
teaching. Online equivalent to Education 240. Not open to students who have taken Education 240. Instructor: 
Stone. One course. C-L: Psychology 240-1
240S. Educational Psychology. CCI, EI, SS Principles of developmental, social, and cognitive psychology 
as applied to education, with a focus on how children learn. Examination of the impact on learning of race, class, 
gender, and ethnicity, including a comparative analysis of cultural differences in American schools. Through 
structured service-learning experiences in local schools, students reflect through writing on ethical issues in 
teaching. Required service-learning. Instructor: Goldwasser. One course. C-L: Psychology 240S
241. Promising Paradigms: Issues and Innovations in American Classrooms. EI, SS, 
STS Examination of promising educational initiatives and reform efforts, analysis of federal and state 
mandates and policies concerning educational issues, and exploration of innovative ideas and programs 
designed to advance classrooms into the 21st century. Focus given to the ethical and political implications of 
reforming America’s schools within the context of policy development. Note: This is an online course with both 
synchronous and asynchronous components. Contact the instructor for additional information. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Stephens. One course. C-L: Public Policy 245, Child Policy Research
243S. Children, Schools, and Society. CCI, EI, SS, W The processes by which children are educated 
in the United States. Ways children acquire through schooling social skills, moral values, and a sense of their 
role in society. Evaluation of the appropriateness of these goals for schooling, how schooling shapes children’s 
development, and how the education policies that sanction these processes are formed. Application of theory 
and research for solving complex societal problems that confront children, schools, and communities. Required 
participation in service-learning. Instructor: Wynn. One course. C-L: Public Policy 243S, Child Policy Research, 
Ethics Elective
244S. Children’s Self Expression: Literacy Through Photography. ALP, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 224S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 207S
255S. Literacy, Writing, Tutoring. SS, W One course. C-L: see Writing 255S
259S. Student Activism, Storytelling, and Community Change. ALP, EI, W The course will include 
an examination of personal narrative in U.S. student activism across multiple media and genres. Students will 
investigate the ways in which personal narratives and storytelling advocate for social justice and reform, the 
ethics and practice of crafting, circulating, and using personal narratives in student-led movements, and the 
university’s role in advancing student activism as a form of civic engagement. Instructor: Ahern-Dodson. One 
course. C-L: Writing 259S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 259S, Human Rights
261S. Peer Academic Advising. Review and discussion of issues related to the theory and practice of peer 
advising and relevant issues in higher education. Open only to students in the peer advising program. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
262. The 21st Century Student: Open Knowledge and Education Innovation. SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 262; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 262
272S. Overlooked Children: Topics of Equity and Access in Gifted Education. CCI, EI, SS The 
underrepresentation of certain groups in gifted programs persists. This course will examine the enrollment 
disparities that exist in gifted and advanced programs, critically review the assessment practices used to identify 
gifted students, and explore educational policy designed to reconcile equity and access issues in education. A 



 Education (EDUC) 333

variety of partners will host students for the service-learning component for this course. Potential partners 
include, but are not limited to, local schools, non-profit organizations, and research centers focusing on equity 
and access issues in education. Instructor: Stephens. One course. C-L: Public Policy 272S
275S. Leadership and the Changing Landscape of Health Care. EI, SS, W Investigates historical, 
educational, social, political, economic and ethical implications of healthcare in US. Explores educational 
preparation of providers and current calls for reform. Analyzes health outcomes and costs as well as implications 
for future national economy. Investigates proposed healthcare models, methods of educating healthcare workers 
for an aging population, inequalities in distribution and political and ethical implications of change. Writing 
intensive: includes short weekly written reflections of assigned readings, mid-term paper on either education or 
policy. Final project will investigate solutions for identified population health problem. Instructor: Sangvai. One 
course. C-L: Global Health 275S
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI, W Study of educational, 
political, ethical, clinical, and personal issues related to working with dying and bereaved people. Focuses on 
diverse populations in education, ethnicity, culture, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation. Various models 
for providing care. Visits from Hospice practitioners and doctors, field trips to funeral home and to Duke 
Hospice where the professor is a social worker. Works to be examined include: Atul Gawande’s “Being Mortal,” 
policy articles on end of life care, and on physician assisted suicide/death with dignity, fiction such as Tolstoy’s 
“Death of Ivan Ilich,” “Me, Earl, and the Dying Girl”. This is a service-learning course. Instructor: Gheith. 
One course. C-L: Global Health 277S, Public Policy 274S, Russian 277S, Study of Ethics 277S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 277S, Human Rights
289S. Learning Outcomes Assessment: Understanding and Using Evidence to Guide Teaching, 
Learning, & Policy. R, SS, STS, W The practice of assessment and its impacts on education policy and 
curriculum. Course introduces undergraduate students to the practice of learning outcomes assessment in 
higher education – its traditions, contexts, and objectives. Students will cultivate critical judgment about the 
issues facing higher education and the ways in which the practice of assessment can help explain and mitigate 
those issues. At some point in their careers, students will be asked to design, execute, or evaluate a body of 
research. Course provides fundamental knowledge and skills necessary to engage in social science research, 
particularly research in education. Instructor: Hill. One course.
290. Selected Topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Education. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Selected Topics. Selected topics seminar. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290T. Freshman-Sophomore Tutorials (TOP). Small group discussions of significant books, authors, and 
ideas in education. May be repeated. Consent of instructor and Director of Undergraduate Studies required. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
298D. Discovering Education and Human Development I: How Social Scientists Learn from 
Data. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 298D; also C-L: Sociology 298D, Psychology 242D
303S. De/Re/Segregation in Education: A Case of Back to the Future?. CCI, EI, SS Course traces 
timeline of segregation, desegregation, integration and resegregation in education in the United States, from 
policies and practices first enacted at this nation’s birth through current policies and practices that challenge our 
commitments to opportunity, equality, and equity. Course invites students to study historical and contemporary 
practices in education, comparing segregation and resegregation as moments in the education history of the US, 
taking recent developments in North Carolina education policy and practice as cases to enrich understanding. 
Students engage in a minimum of 20 hours of planned service activities. Instructor: Anderson. One course. C-L: 
Public Policy 340S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 303S, Human Rights
307S. Issues of Education and Immigration. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 307S; also C-L: 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 307S
310S. School Dropout and Educational Policy. CCI, R, SS, W The history of the US school dropout 
issue, scope of the problem, current statistics and trends. Overview of theories and research related to school 
dropout and educational attainment. Analysis of effective dropout prevention strategies, programs, and policies. 



  Education (EDUC)334

Emphasis on critical thinking, discussion, and application. Participation in service-learning is an option, 
incorporating issues of race/ethnicity, socioeconomic status, gender, and culture. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 244S, Cultural Anthropology 251S
321S. Infancy, Early Childhood, and Educational Programs. CCI, EI, SS A comprehensive 
introduction to the field of early childhood education and child development from infancy to age eight. 
Examines programs, strategies, trends, and methods that reflect current educational practice and research. 
Involves structured service-learning experiences in which students engage in comparative analysis of children 
of various cultures. Students also examine ethical issues encountered in early childhood programs. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
333S. Legal Issues in Education. R, SS, W A case analysis approach giving students an opportunity 
to identify and review past, current, and emerging legal issues and theories in education. Topics include 
students’ rights (for example search and seizures, due process), institutional liability and teacher’s rights at the 
elementary and secondary levels and in the college setting. Instructor: Wasiolek. One course.
338S. Race, Class and the Rise of the American Charter School. CCI, EI, SS, W Students explore 
the legitimacy of the charter school as an educational reform movement, designed to offer alternatives for 
underserved student populations. Students explore: the role of choice in public education; charter schools 
fulfilling or contradicting the American philosophical and historical narrative; impact of KIPP, TFA and 
Harlem Success Academy; the Brown decision through the lens of the charter movement; re-segregation vs. 
self segregation; parental and family educational rights; privatization of public education. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 338S
345S. Asians in American Higher Education: Trends and Issues. CCI, EI, R, SS An interdisciplinary 
examination of the history and experience of students of Asian descent at the higher education level, including 
demographic trends, sociocultural development, and access and support. Special attention will be given to 
intragroup diversity within the Asian/American community in today’s global context. Instructor: Chin. One 
course. C-L: Sociology 346S
347S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 347S; also C-L: History 334S, Sociology 324S, Public Policy 350S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 347S, Human Rights
356S. Digital Durham. ALP, R, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 356S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 358S, History 382S
363. Educational Leadership In and Beyond the Classroom. EI, R, SS, W Introduction to study of 
culture, organization, and leadership in K-12 schools. Exploration of the history of leadership theories and 
practices and their application to current educational settings. Focus on moral dilemmas, ethical concepts, 
and general nature of ethical reasoning in varied school settings. Contrast the current focus on school reform 
through increased accountability, high stakes testing, and standards with the power of shared systems of norms, 
values, and traditions. Study of essential skills of leadership: communication, human relations, shared decision 
making, and conflict resolution. Includes a service-learning component involving work in the community. 
Instructor: Wynn. One course.
366. Exceptional Learners: Policies and Practices. R, SS Provides a foundation of legal, social, 
educational, and psychological concepts focusing on understanding of exceptional learners. Explores social, 
cultural, and family context in which exceptional children live and learn. Educational approaches discussed 
within context of educational restructuring, with emphasis on determining appropriateness of educational 
placement of students viewed as exceptional. Overviews of various approaches to instructional interventions for 
students with exceptionalities are also examined. Prerequisites: Education 101, 240 or 243S. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Stephens. Half course.
371S. Cognition in the Classroom: Applying the Science of Learning to Education. NS, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Psychology 371S
390T-1. Junior-Senior Tutorials (Topics). Small group discussions of significant books, authors, and 
ideas in education. The availability of tutorials, their content, and the instructors will be announced before 
preregistration. Consent of instructor required. Instructors: Staff. Half course.



 Education (EDUC) 335

390T-2. Junior-Senior Tutorials. Small group discussions of significant authors and ideas in education. 
Different courses indicated by letter. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. Instructors: Staff. Half 
course.
391. Independent Study. Directed readings in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project on a previously approved topic. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive research paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic 
Engagement. CZ, EI The fourth course in the Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change is a capstone 
seminar. Students will connect the intellectual themes and scholarly knowledge they have developed in the 
gateway and elective courses with the learning that has occurred in the two thematically related co-curricular 
experiences—to create theoretically informed praxis in the spirit of this experiential certificate. The capstone 
course will require students to critically re-examine strands introduced in the gateway course with the goal of 
encouraging students to determine in what ways concepts are illustrated in their co-curricular experiences. 
Prerequisite: CESC 201S. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Mlyn. One course. C-L: Civic Engagement and 
Social Change 401S, Political Science 401S, Public Policy 401S, Study of Ethics 401S, Ethics Elective
407S. Teaching Practices in Elementary Mathematics and Science. SS, STS Research-based teaching 
practices in elementary mathematics and science for culturally diverse populations. Emphasis on the influence 
of science, mathematics, and technology in social issues and shaping teacher decision making about teaching 
and learning. Readings and field experience on ethical teaching practices, role of teachers and schools in society, 
and impact of teacher effect on environment and student learning. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Carboni. One course.
408S. Teaching Practices in Elementary Language Arts and Social Studies. CCI, EI, SS Research-
based teaching practices in elementary language arts and social studies for culturally diverse populations. 
Emphasis on literacy development across grade levels and content areas. Readings and field experience 
promoting critical analysis of ethical teaching practices, role of teachers and schools in society, and impact of 
teacher effect on environment and student learning. Consent of instructor required. Includes a service-learning 
component involving work in the community. Instructor: Riggsbee. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
409S. Elementary Curriculum. Analysis, development, and evaluation of elementary curriculum with 
emphasis on integrating the expressive arts with literacy, mathematics, social studies, and science. Using 
Gardner’s multiple intelligences model of learning, students write comprehensive curriculum units that focus on 
meeting the needs of learners from diverse social, ethnic, and cultural groups. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Riggsbee or Stephens. One course.
410S. Research/Reflective Practice Elementary Education. R, SS, W Classroom-based action research 
and structured reflection to promote the development of inquiry-oriented teachers. Systematic, long-term 
research project focused on meeting the diverse needs of learners in the elementary classroom. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
420. Elementary Education: Practicum. EI Engagement, as part of a teaching practicum in elementary 
schools, in active classroom research projects by designing, implementing, and evaluating units of instruction. 
Creation of a portfolio of products to demonstrate technology competencies for teaching certification. Students 
also reflect and write on ethical issues involved in their service experiences in public schools. Instructor consent 
required. Service-Learning course. Instructor: Riggsbee or Stephens. Two courses.
420-1. Elementary Education: Practicum. EI Engagement, as part of a teaching practicum in elementary 
schools, in active classroom research projects by designing, implementing, and evaluating units of instruction. 
Creation of a portfolio of products to demonstrate technology competencies for teaching certification. Students 
also reflect and write on ethical issues involved in their service experiences in public schools. Includes an 
optional pre-semester guided study, either domestic or global, focused on culturally and socially responsive 
teaching and learning. Instructor consent required. Service-Learning course. Instructor: Riggsbee. Two courses.



  Education (EDUC)336

430S. Women and the Professions. EI, R, SS, W Interdisciplinary analysis of the history of ideas about 
women and the professions with emphasis on women’s actions, past, present and future. The changing status 
of women in professional life; ethical and political implications of public and personal decision-making. Study 
of research and writing by and about women in professional fields; interviews with working women. Research 
paper integrating students’ major, the internship experience and their future goals required. Senior seminar 
open only to Baldwin Scholars. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Ahern-Dodson and Scott. One course. 
C-L: Sociology 430S, Ethics Elective
446S. From Reconstruction to No Child Left Behind: The Challenges of Reform in a Nation 
Divided. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Exploration of the challenges of crafting and sustaining equitable educational 
reform in the United States from Reconstruction to NCLB. Students will assess and evaluate the impact of broad 
historical, Constitutional and philosophical forces on the educational terrain. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Education. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Selected Topics. Selected topics seminar. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Teaching Practices in Secondary Education. Secondary School curriculum and instruction with 
special emphasis placed on meeting the needs of high school students from diverse cultural backgrounds. 
Includes field-based experience with a focus on examining ethical teaching practices. Instructor: McDonald. One 
course.
496S. Secondary School Issues: Pedagogy, Culture, and Methods. CCI, EI, SS, STS Examination 
of schools and classrooms of the twenty-first century with focus on values, beliefs, and assumptions underlying 
teaching and learning in high school. Emphasis on ethical issues in teaching, pedagogical and methodological 
practices, teacher leadership, and impact of technology on schooling. Exploration of social fabric of schools as 
related to diversity, educational philosophies, and school culture by viewing these constructs from divergent 
perspectives. Students complete an extensive research project based on fieldwork in a local high school. 
Instructor: Smith. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
497S. Seminar in Secondary School Teaching. EI, R Principles, practices, and problems in secondary 
school instruction, including a focus on values and ethics in teaching. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Smith. One course.
498. Secondary Education: Practicum. CCI, R, SS Supervised practicum in a local high school focused 
on integration of educational theories and effective teaching practices. Design, implementation, and evaluation 
of units of instruction. Creation of portfolio to demonstrate competencies for teaching certification in a specific 
secondary content field. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Smith. Two courses.
498-1. Secondary Education: Practicum. CCI, R, SS Supervised practicum in a local high school focused 
on integration of educational theories and effective teaching practices. Design, implementation, and evaluation 
of units of instruction. Creation of portfolio to demonstrate competencies for teaching certification in a specific 
secondary content field. Includes an optional pre-semester guided study, either domestic or global, focused on 
culturally and socially responsive teaching and learning. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Smith. Two 
courses.
514. Technology, Society, and Schools. SS Role of technology in schools and society. Introduction for 
preservice teacher candidates to technology tools including Photoshop, web design, and digital storytelling. 
Emphasis on integrating technology into instruction and utilizing technology to become educational leaders. 
Includes elements of design through completion of online portfolio. Designed to meet the North Carolina 
Department of Public Instruction technology requirements for teaching licensure. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
518S. Approaches and Practices in Second Language Pedagogy. CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 518S; also C-L: Linguistics 518S
525. Global Engagement and Career Development through Service-Learning. CCI, SS In this 
half-credit course students will examine the research literature on cultural competence and engage with people 
of diverse cultural backgrounds through various cultural and language exchange programs offered at Duke. 
One goal this half-credit course is to expose students to differences in cultural norms and social systems. The 



 Education (EDUC) 337

readings and experiential activities are designed to enable the students to examine their own cultural lenses 
and assumptions and increase their intercultural competency to be true global citizens, well prepared for the 
increasingly globalized society and job market. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Jeong. Half course.
542S. Schooling and Social Stratification. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 542S; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 549S, Child Policy Research
590. Special Topics. Selected topics in education. Instructor: Staff. One course.
591. Independent Study. Directed readings in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project on a previously approved topic. Consent of 
instructor and director of graduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
620. Nature and Needs of the Gifted Learner: Introduction to Characteristics and Educ/
Affective Needs. Introduction to characteristics and unique educational and affective needs of gifted learners. 
Analysis of philosophical considerations, historical perspectives, definitions and types of giftedness, incidence, 
and evaluation procedures. Cultural comparisons of the manifestations of giftedness, ways of reversing 
underrepresentation of minority students in programs for the gifted, and affective social-emotional topics/issues 
relating to giftedness. This course is a post-bacc, non-degree course not open to Duke undergraduates. Consent 
of instructor required. Instructor: Stephens. One course.
621. Methods and Materials for Teaching the Gifted Learner: Procedures for Differentiating 
Instruction. Fundamental procedures for differentiating instruction for gifted and talented students. 
Comparison of theories and research models regarding instructional practice. Focus on research based 
instructional strategies. Apply, analyze, implement, and evaluate various methods and models of gifted 
education. This course is a post-bacc, non-degree course not open to Duke undergraduates. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Stephens. One course.
622. Differentiating Curriculum for the Gifted Learner: Program Planning and Curriculum 
Development. Organize and deliver appropriate curriculum for gifted and talented students. Focus on 
program planning, exemplary program models, development of differentiated curriculum with appropriate 
modifications to content, process, product and learning environment. Instructor: Stephens. One course.
623. Practicum and Seminar in Gifted Education. Supervised practicum with gifted learners in a 
differentiated education program. Students plan, develop, and evaluate educational experiences, with a special 
emphasis on the social and emotional development of gifted learners. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Stephens. One course.
690S. Selected Topics Seminar. May be repeated. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.

The Minor
The minor in education is designed to provide students who are majoring in arts and sciences disciplines 

with opportunities to combine coursework in their majors with academic and field-based experiences focused on 
the complex social, psychological, economic, scientific, technological, historical, political, and cultural issues that 
impact education, schooling, teaching, and learning throughout the lifespan. 

Requirements. A total of five courses including two required courses: Education 101 and Education 240. 
The three remaining courses are electives. Only one of the five courses may be taken at an institution other than 
Duke. 

University Teacher Preparation Programs
The Duke University Teacher Preparation Programs offer secondary teacher licensure programs at both the 

undergraduate and master’s levels and an elementary licensure program at the undergraduate level. A common 
conceptual framework—preparing knowledgeable and skilled instructors who conduct themselves professionally 
and ethically as they practice reflective teaching—links the Teacher Preparation Programs. As students complete 
general education requirements of Trinity College and of a selected major, they may also fulfill requirements of 
an approved Duke Teacher Preparation Program and become licensed to teach. Licensure by the Duke-approved 
program is authorized through the State Board of Education in North Carolina and is reciprocal with most 



  Education (EDUC)338

states. A license to teach along with an undergraduate degree are required by most public school systems and 
recommended by many independent schools. Duke University is accredited by the North Carolina Department 
of Public Instruction (DPI) and the Council for the Accreditation of Educator Preparation and has reciprocal 
approval for initial licensure with most of the fifty states. Title II data is available upon request. 

Brief descriptions of two undergraduate programs based on bachelor of arts or bachelor of science degrees 
(secondary school teaching and elementary teaching) follow. 

Secondary School Teaching (AB or BS degree)
The Program in Education offers secondary school teacher licensure programs in English, mathematics, 

social studies, and science. Prospective teachers are advised to consult with the academic advisors in their majors 
and the secondary program director concerning their interest in teaching and this licensure program.

Interested undergraduate students may apply to the secondary school teaching program beginning in the 
sophomore year. Students are accepted by competitive criteria into a program that includes education courses 
with field experiences in local schools and an intensive senior spring semester teaching practicum. During 
the practicum, students teach high school classes in their respective disciplines under the supervision of an 
experienced mentor teacher and a university professor. 

Upon successful completion of the senior year spring semester practicum and the four-year Trinity College 
undergraduate degree, students earn a teaching license and the minor in education. 

Elementary School Teaching (AB or BS degree)
Undergraduate students who plan to teach young children (kindergarten through sixth grade) may become 

eligible for licensure to teach while at Duke in addition to completing any academic major offered by Trinity 
College. The Elementary School Teaching Program provides students with opportunities to examine critical 
issues in public education and engage with K-6 schools through supervised field experiences in diverse classroom 
settings. The senior spring capstone semester includes a student teaching practicum in a local public school in 
Durham in addition to courses on curriculum design and implementation. 

Interested undergraduate students may apply to the Elementary School Teaching Program beginning in the 
sophomore year. Students are selected by competitive criteria for participation in the program.

Upon successful completion of the senior year spring semester practicum and the four-year Trinity College 
undergraduate degree, students earn a teaching license and the minor in education. 

Master of Arts in Teaching (MAT) in Secondary Schools
The Master of Arts in Teaching Program is designed for students who wish to teach english, mathematics, 

or science in secondary schools by completing a twelve-month graduate degree, which begins in July and ends the 
following June. 

Additional information is available from the MAT office. This program is approved for teacher licensure by 
the State Board of Education in North Carolina and is reciprocal with most states. 

Electrical and Computer Engineering
For courses in electrical and computer engineering, see page 839.

Energy and the Environment 
Professor Emily Klein and Professor Josiah Knight, Codirectors 

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The undergraduate certificate in energy and the environment is designed to provide Duke undergraduates 

in both Trinity and Pratt with an understanding of the breadth of issues that confront our society in its need 
for clean, affordable, and reliable energy. An expertise in energy will expand the student’s career options in the 
private, nonprofit, government, and academic sectors. In addition to integrative core and capstone courses, the 
certificate will expose students to the three key disciplines in the study of energy and the environment: markets 
and policy; environmental impacts and resources; and energy technology. The goal of the certificate is to develop 
innovative thinkers and leaders who understand the energy system as a whole and the important interconnections 
among policy, markets, technology, and the environment. Energy use is a multifaceted problem that draws upon 
the perspectives and expertise of a variety of disciplines; the certificate in energy and the environment is therefore 



 Education (EDUC) 339

similarly interdisciplinary.
Beyond traditional coursework, the certificate in energy and the environment will offer a variety of activities 

intended to provide students with a real-world perspective and hands-on experiences. These include field trips, 
guest speakers such as visiting executives and practitioners, research opportunities, and internships. Additional 
information may be obtained from the Energy Initiative. 

Program Requirements
Students pursuing the certificate in energy and the environment have the opportunity to choose from two 

different pathways. The first option is a course-based pathway consisting of six courses, including the Core and 
Capstone courses (which are required for every certificate student). No more than three of the six courses may 
originate in a single department. No more than two courses counted toward the certificate in energy and the 
environment may also satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, or other certificate program.

The second option is an experiential pathway. This pathway combines four courses (the Core and Capstone 
courses and two electives) with two experiential components: one research/design experience and one field 
experience. In this pathway, no more than one course counted toward the certificate in energy and the environment 
may also satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, or other certificate program. Completion of a publicly-
facing e-portfolio is also required.

AP credit may not fulfill certificate requirements in either pathway.

In the standard course-based pathway, six courses are required for completion of the certificate program: 
• One introductory course: Earth and Ocean Sciences/Environment/Energy 231 (Energy and the 

Environment)
• One elective course from each of the following three areas: Markets and Policy; Environment; 

and Energy Science and Technology (See approved elective courses below.)
• One additional elective course, selected from elective course list below, other energy courses, or 

approved independent study. 
• One Capstone Project Course: Energy 395/396 (Connections in Energy: Energy and the 

Environment: Design and Innovation). Teams of undergraduate and graduate students work with 
faculty supervisors on a Bass Connections team to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to 
pressing energy issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other 
experts from business, government, and the nonprofit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with 
or contribute to an on-going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work 
and other learning experiences relevant to the project. Participation consists of a half-credit course in 
the fall and a full-credit course in the spring, typically taken in the certificate candidate’s senior year. 
Instructor consent required.

In the experiential pathway of the certificate, students take four courses and complete two experiences:
• One introductory course: Earth and Ocean Sciences/Environment/Energy 231 (Energy and the 

Environment)
• One elective course from both of the following areas: Markets and Policy; and Energy Science 

and Technology (See approved elective courses below.)
• Two experiences: one research/design experience and one field experience. One experience must 

exceed 300 hours; the other must exceed 150 hours. Both experiences must be energy-related, and 
two different types of experiences must be completed. Students must receive pre-approval for the two 
thematically-related experiences. 

• One Capstone Project Course: Energy 395/396 (Connections in Energy: Energy and the 
Environment: Design and Innovation). Teams of undergraduate and graduate students work with 
faculty supervisors on a Bass Connections team to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to 
pressing energy issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other 
experts from business, government, and the nonprofit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with 
or contribute to an on-going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work 
and other learning experiences relevant to the project. Participation consists of a half-credit course in 
the fall and a full-credit course in the spring, typically taken in the certificate candidate’s senior year. 
Instructor consent required.

• E-portfolio: Must reflect coursework and experiential learning



  Education (EDUC)340

Electives (requirement differs depending upon chosen pathway)
Four elective courses are required for the course-based pathway, with one course chosen from each of the 

three key areas (Markets and Policy, Environment, and Energy Science and Technology) taken from the below 
list. The fourth elective is a “free” elective and may repeat any one of the key areas. For the experiential pathway, 
two elective courses are required in the markets and policy and energy science and technology areas. The most 
up-to-date version of this list can be found on the program’s website at https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/
certificate-programs/certificate-energy-environment.

Markets and Policy
Economics
119. Introduction to Political Economy
339. Environmental Economics and Policy
Environment
212. United States Environmental Policy
363. Environmental Economics and Policy
544S. Collective Action, Property Rights, and the Environment
577. Environmental Politics
583S. Energy and U.S. National Security
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
213. United States Environmental Policy
Political Science
145. Introduction to Political Economy
549S. Collective Action, Property Rights, and the Environment
663S. Energy and U.S. National Security
Public Policy
275. United States Environmental Policy
577. Environmental Politics
583S. Energy and U.S. National Security

Environment (required only for course-based pathway)
Chemistry
91. Chemistry, Technology, and Society
Civil and Environmental Engineering
461L. Environmental Aquatic Chemistry
462L. Applied Biological Principles and Processes in Environmental Engineering
Earth and Ocean Sciences
355. Global Warming
364S. Changing Oceans
Environment
102. Introduction to Environmental Sciences and Policy
245. The Theory and Practice of Sustainability
362S. Changing Oceans
Sustainability Engagement
245. The Theory and Practice of Sustainability

Energy Science and Technology
Note: in selecting the elective course in energy science and technology, it is important to consider which course will provide 
optimal preparation for the student’s capstone project course. Students should discuss their selection of this elective with a 
codirector of the program.
Energy
310. Introduction to Energy Generation, Delivery, Conversion and Efficiency
383. Engineering the Global Middle East
630. Transportation and Energy
Energy Engineering
310. Introduction to Energy Generation, Delivery, Conversion and Efficiency
Environment
630. Transportation and Energy
Global Health
549S. Histories of Science and Technology
History
106. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
383. Engineering the Global Middle East
549S. Histories of Science and Technology
International Comparative Studies
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science
461. Energy Engineering and the Environment
Physics
137S. Energy in the 21st Century and Beyond

https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/certificate-programs/certificate-energy-environment
https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/certificate-programs/certificate-energy-environment


Energy (ENERGY) 341

Science & Society
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
549S. Histories of Science and Technology

Students may also participate in a Bass Connections in Energy & Environment team (see Capstone Project 
description) as their fourth elective course for the certificate’s course-based pathway.

Energy Initiative
Energy education at Duke capitalizes on the university’s broader Energy Initiative, a university-wide 

interdisciplinary collaboration addressing today’s pressing energy challenges related to the economy, the 
environment, and security. Duke students—at all levels—will gain the training, skills, and experiences needed to 
play leadership roles in a rapidly evolving energy future. For more details see energy.duke.edu. 

There are many different curricular opportunities within the energy designation. Undergraduate students 
may opt to enroll in a certificate program through the energy and environment certificate, and Pratt School of 
Engineering students may also choose to minor in energy engineering. Professional students may choose to 
concentrate in energy within many of their programs. In addition, students may register for an energy gateway 
course or go deeper by registering for one of the energy depth courses. 

In addition to the traditional courses, students may also choose to become involved with the Energy & 
Environment theme within Bass Connections. Bass Connections in Energy & Environment independent study 
courses engages students and faculty in team-oriented, problem-focused education across disciplines, educational 
levels, and schools; geographic boundaries; and boundaries between the university, business, civil society, and 
government. 

Courses in Energy (ENERGY)
89S. Special Topics: First-Year Seminar. First-year seminar. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
190. Special Topics in Energy. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Seminar in Energy: Special Topics. Topics vary by semester. Open only to 
students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
231. Energy and the Environment. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 231; also C-L: Earth 
and Ocean Sciences 231
290. Special Topics in Energy. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
310. Introduction to Energy Generation, Delivery, Conversion and Efficiency. One course. C-L: see 
Energy Engineering 310; also C-L: Energy and the Environment
325S. Economic Analysis of Current Energy Issues. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Economics 325S
364. Green Germany: World Leader in Environmental Policy. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see German 364; also C-L: History 250, Environment 366
383. Engineering the Global Middle East. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 383; also 
C-L: Energy and the Environment
390. Special Topics in Energy. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Energy. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395. Connections in Energy: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and graduate 
students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to pressing energy 
issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other experts from business, 
government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or contribute to an on-going 
research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other learning experiences 
relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395-1. Connections in Energy: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and 
graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to pressing 
energy issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other experts from 

http://energy.duke.edu


 Energy (ENERGY)342

business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or contribute to an on-
going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other learning experiences 
relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
395A. Connections in Energy: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and 
graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to pressing 
energy issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other experts from 
business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or contribute to an on-
going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other learning experiences 
relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. 
Instructor consent required. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course.
396. Connections in Energy: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and 
graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to pressing 
energy issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other experts from 
business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or contribute to an on-
going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other learning experiences 
relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
396-1. Connections in Energy: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and 
graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to pressing 
energy issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting energy fellows, and other experts from 
business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or contribute to an on-
going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other learning experiences 
relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
452L. Energy and Environment Design. NS, R One course. C-L: see Environment 452L
520. Resource & Environmental Economics I. SS C-L: see Environment 520; also C-L: Economics 530, 
Public Policy 576
524. Water Quality Health. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 524; also C-L: Environment 524, Global 
Health 534
590. Special Topics in Energy. Content to be determined each semester. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff.
590-1. Special Topics in Energy. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff.
590S. Advanced Topics in Energy. Selected topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff.
620. Energy Finance. Exploration of energy financing and investment decisions as they relate to energy 
companies and energy-related projects. Key topics include discount rates, discounted cash flows, valuation 
approaches, option pricing, real options, energy derivatives, project finance, energy specific taxation, and risk 
management. Prerequisites: College-level calculus, Introductory Micro/Macroeconomics (Economics 101 
Economic Principles or equivalent), and either Economics 572, Environment 782, or Engineering Management 
530.
630. Transportation and Energy. SS, STS C-L: see Environment 630; also C-L: Energy and the 
Environment
631. Energy Technology and Impact on the Environment. NS, STS C-L: see Environment 631
635. Energy Economics and Policy. SS C-L: see Environment 635
638. Environmental Life Cycle Analysis & Decision. NS, R, STS C-L: see Environment 638

Engineering
For courses in engineering, see page 853.



 English (ENGLISH) 343

English
Professor Mitchell, Chair; Professor Vadde, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Aers, Armstrong, 
Beckwith, Ferraro, Khanna, Mitchell, Mackey, Moi, Pfau, Porter, Strandberg, Tennenhouse, Tetel, Torgovnick, 
and Wald; Associate Professors Baran, Jaji, Psomiades, Stan, Sussman, and Vadde; Assistant Professors Black, 
D’Alessandro, McInnis, and Werlin; Professors of the Practice Donahue and Sharma; Assistant Professors of the 
Practice Gritton and Maren

A major, a minor, and a minor in creative writing are available in this department.

Courses in English (ENGLISH)
20. Literature and Composition. Credit for Advanced Placement on the basis of the College Board 
examination in literature and composition. One course.
22. Composition and Language. Credit for Advanced Placement on the basis of the College Board 
examination in composition and language. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar on Literature. Topics vary each semester offered. Prior to the drop/add period, 
this course is restricted to first-year students who have not fulfilled their seminar requirement. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
90S. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary by semester; emphasis on development of writing skills. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
101S. The Art of Reading. ALP, W An introduction to the skills of critical reading through the close 
examination of literary works, or other media such as film. Instructor: Staff. One course.
110S. Introduction to Creative Writing. ALP, W A multi-genre course designed for students who have 
little or no previous experience producing imaginative literary texts. This course does not count toward the 
English major, but would count toward the minor in creative writing. Instructor: Staff. One course.
171. Representative American Writers. ALP, W Continuation of English 161. Selections and complete 
works. James, Frost or Robinson, Crane or Dreiser, O’Neill, Faulkner, Hemingway, and others. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
173FS. The Ethics of Democracy. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 171FS
173S. The Ethics of Democracy. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 171S
181. Introduction to Film Studies. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 289; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 278, Literature 110, Documentary Studies 264, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
190-1. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in English. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS-2. Focus Program Seminar: Topics on Literature. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
190FS-3. Focus Program Seminar: Topics on Linguistics. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
190S-1. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in English. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
196FSA. Literature of the Sea. ALP, W Travel narratives, poetry, novels, drama, epics, and film that 
take place at sea, or on island shores, as well as secondary literature that theorizes on physical, political, and 
philosophical possibilities in supra- and transnational spaces. Emphasis on the social, cultural, and political 
structures that function at sea, focusing on exile, imperial travel, the Middle Passage, cosmopolitan journeys, 
shipwreck, and tourism. Material can include eco-criticism/fiction on Marine Lab travel sites: Singapore, 
Hawaii, Trinidad, Carolina islands. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course.



  English (ENGLISH)344

198FS. Performing Science: Experimentation, Collaboration, and Artistry. ALP, R, STS One 
course. C-L: see Science & Society 198FS; also C-L: Literature 198FS, Theater Studies 198FS
202S. Introduction to Performance Studies. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 202S; 
also C-L: Literature 202S, Cultural Anthropology 219S, Visual and Media Studies 205S
204. History of English. SS Introduction to methods and principles of historical linguistics, as exemplified 
by the history of the English language from Proto-Indo-European to the present. Not open to students who have 
taken English 208S. Satisfies the Criticism, Theory, and Methodology (CTM) for English majors. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 204
206. Variety in Language: English in the United States. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 206
208S. Criticism and the Arts. ALP, W This is a course in the critical practice of literary theory in relation to 
the arts--literature, but also possibly the visual and performing arts--that occasion and challenge it. Exemplars 
to be drawn from the Anglo-European, Trans-oceanic, and/or North American (including multicultural) 
oeuvres, both contemporary and established. Ultimate concern is to develop each student’s own critical writing, 
drawing upon brilliant precedents, responding creatively to the literature/arts at hand, and crafting personal 
voice. Instructor: Staff. One course.
209FS. The Mind and Language. SS Explores how traditional and new models of language interpret the 
capacity for language in its relationship to the neurosciences, the cognitive sciences, and the social sciences. For 
Focus Program students only. Instructor: Andresen. One course. C-L: Linguistics 210FS
210SA. Writing for Publication. ALP, W Same as English 210S. Offered through the Duke in New York 
Program. Instructor: Torgovnick. One course.
211S. Digital Writing. ALP, W Theory and practice of emergent forms of writing in digital media; includes 
advanced instruction in writing for blogs, wikis, and other digital environments. Instructor: Staff. One course.
213S. The Documentary Essay: Exploration, Research, and the Peripatetic Tradition in 
Documentary Writing. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 275S
214S. Documentary Writing Workshop. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 311S; also 
C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 311S
220S. Introduction to the Writing of Poetry. ALP, W The introductory level genre specific workshops 
are for students with some experience in creative writing who wish to deepen their knowledge of their chosen 
genre and gain increased mastery of elements of craft. Recommended for students who have taken English 110S. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
221S. Introduction to the Writing of Fiction. ALP, W Introductory level genre-specific workshops for 
students with some experience in creative writing wishing to deepen their knowledge of their chosen genre and 
gain increased mastery of elements of craft. Recommended for students who have taken English 110. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
222S. Introduction to the Writing of Creative Non-Fiction. ALP, W The introductory level genre-
specific workshops are for students with some experience in creative writing who wish to deepen their 
knowledge of their chosen genre and gain increased mastery of elements of craft. Recommended for students 
who have taken English 110S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
224S. Ready for Prime Time: Writing the Dramatic TV Episode. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater 
Studies 285S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 220S
225S. Writing the Movie. Introduction to the Theory and Practice of Writing for the Screen. ALP, 
W One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 360S
226S. Dramatic Writing. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 280S
227S. Writing Movies and Plays: Adaptation. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 282S; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 321S
228S. Writing the Musical Book. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 216S; also C-L: Music 220S
235. Shakespeare. ALP, EI, W Introduction to the major works of Shakespeare. Exploration of the author’s 
central themes and contexts, with particular focus on Shakespeare’s exploration of love as a mode of ethical 



 English (ENGLISH) 345

inquiry and moral philosophy. Satisfies Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 330, Theater Studies 222
236S. Shakespeare’s Nature. ALP, EI This class explores conflicting and competing ideas about nature in 
Shakespeare’s plays. We examine creatureliness, human and non-human, in relation to ideas of the natural and 
the supernatural. Instructor: Beckwith. One course.
237. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see Italian 337; 
also C-L: Jewish Studies 337, Literature 337
244. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Italian 220; also C-L: 
German 243, Literature 244, Jewish Studies 243, International Comparative Studies 212
245. English Literature of the Romantic Period. ALP Wordsworth, Coleridge, Byron, Shelley, Keats. 
Satisfies Area II requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
246. Jane Austen. ALP This course traces the development of Jane Austen’s writing and ideas through her 
six major novels. Instructor: Sussman. One course.
247. Victorian Literature. ALP Major works and genres of Victorian literature by such authors as the 
Brontes, Dickens, Hardy, Tennyson, Carlyle, Browning, Arnold, and Ruskin. Satisfies Area II requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
251. British Literature: 1900 to 1945. ALP Major genres and works by such authors as Yeats, Conrad, 
Shaw, Joyce, Lawrence, Woolf, Eliot, Auden, among others. Satisfies Area III requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
253. Social Marketing: From Literary Celebrities to Instagram Influencers. SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 253
254. Medieval Christianity in Film and Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 261; 
also C-L: History 244, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 354
258. Religion and the Novel in Modern India. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 258; also 
C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 255
269. Classics of American Literature, 1820-1860. ALP Prose and poetry by such authors as Emerson, 
Thoreau, Hawthorne, Poe, Melville, and Whitman. Satisfies the Area II requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
269S. Classics of American Literature, 1820-1860. ALP, CZ, W What makes a “classic” of American 
literature? Why do a handful of texts endure while others have fallen by the wayside? By reading a variety of 
well-known texts from early American literature, we pose-and attempt to answer-these questions. Supplemental 
readings illuminate pivotal political debates, social movements, gender struggles, and ethnic clashes from 1820 
to 1860. Texts include Nathaniel Hawthorne’s The Scarlet Letter, Walt Whitman’s Leaves of Grass, and Harriet 
Beecher Stowe’s Uncle Tom’s Cabin, as well as works by Dickinson, Melville, Douglass, and Poe. Films will 
include Sleepy Hollow (1999) and 12 Years a Slave (2013). Instructor: D’Alessandro. One course.
270. Classics of American Literature, 1860 to 1915. ALP, CCI Prose and poetry by such authors as 
Cather, Chesnutt, Chopin, Crane, Dickinson, DuBois, Freeman, Gilman, James, Jewett, Twain, Washington, 
Wharton. Satisfies Area II requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
271. Classics of American Literature, 1915 to 1960. ALP Prose and poetry by such authors as Eliot, 
Fitzgerald, Hemingway, Faulkner, and others. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
272SA. Transforming Fiction for Stage and Screen. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
282SA
274. The Dramatic Monster: Horror on Stage and Screen. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
277
276. African Diaspora Literature: Twentieth- and Twenty-First-Century Black Writers. ALP, 
CCI, CZ, EI, W Late-nineteenth-century to contemporary writers, including African American, Caribbean, and 
African authors. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Jaji. One course. C-L: African 



  English (ENGLISH)346

& African American Studies 224
277. The Novel, Live!. ALP A course in the truly contemporary Anglophone novel, designed as a Signature 
Course for students across all majors and classes who want to ask the big questions about life and the ways 
we aspire to live it most fully, intensely, and in its highest forms. The course is team-taught in an interactive 
update of the Socratic method. Likely authors include Toni Morrison, Cormac McCarthy, J.M. Coetzee, Kazuo 
Ishiguro—and lesser known, but no less magisterial, visionaries. In addition to Nobel Prize, Man-Booker, and 
National Book Award winning novelists, students will encounter an example of the newest 21st-century novel-
form: an epic TV series such Deadwood, The Sopranos, or The Wire. Instructor: Ferraro and Moses. One course.
279S. Docu-Poetry: Real Life Truths Outside and Inside the Poetic Narrative. ALP, EI, W One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 279S; also C-L: Literature 279S
281. American Apocalypse: Beat Generation Spirituality. ALP, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Religion 281; also C-L: Literature 281
282S. Modernism and the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ This course places international modernism in an 
intermedial perspective, presenting it as a broad conversation among international artists across various art 
forms. In addition to reading major literary works by writers such as Baudelaire, Mallarmé, Joyce, Eliot, Kafka, 
Woolf, Wat, Babel, Rilke, Anand, Césaire, Lu Hsun, students will enhance their understanding of modernism 
through exposure to other art forms, such as painting (Matisse, Picasso, Marc, Kandinsky, Chagall, Schoenberg), 
sculpture (Rodin, Brancusi, Giacometti), music (Schumann, Débussy, Stravinsky, Schoenberg, Berg, Gershwin), 
and film (Buñuel, Dali, Eisenstein, Vertov, Carné, Godard, Ruttmann, Cavalcanti, Vigo). Instructor: Stan. One 
course. C-L: Art History 281S, German 282S, Romance Studies 282S, Literature 282S
284S. Book Publishing & Marketing: A Case Study of the Romance Fiction Industry. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, W One course. C-L: see History 248S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 248S
285. Existentialism. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 285; also C-L: Philosophy 285
287. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see German 262; also C-L: Literature 252
287D. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see German 262D; also C-L: Literature 252D
288. American Dreams, American Movies. ALP A survey course in selected American films that create 
as well as reflect American national identity. Through lectures, weekly screenings and students’ oral reports, 
we will study a dozen of the best-loved movies in our popular culture, from The Gold Rush, King Kong, and It 
Happened One Night to Singing’ in the Rain, The Godfather, and WALL-E. We will examine how these movies, 
their directors, and their stars, came to define American mythologies in the twentieth century and how they 
have collected over time iconic resonance. Attention as well to genre, form, technique, and Hollywood’s history. 
Instructor: Malone. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 272, Visual and Media Studies 355
290-7. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Area requirements for majors to be determined by the 
Director of Undergraduate Studies in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290AS-1. Topics in Renaissance British Literature. (Taught in the Oxford Summer Program). Satisfies 
Area I for English majors. Instructor: Staff. Two courses. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 290AS-1
290AS-2. Topics in Nineteenth-Century British Literature. Taught in the Oxford Summer Program. 
Satisfies the Area II or III requirement for English major. To be determined by the Director of Undergraduate 
Studies in English. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
290FS. Special Focus Topics in Writing. Topics vary each semester offered. Open only to students in the 
Focus program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290S-1. Special Topics in Medieval and Early Modern Literature. A major author, topic, or theme of 
the medieval and early modern period (excluding Chaucer). Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. 
Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 290S-1
290S-2. Special Topics in Eighteenth and Nineteenth Century Lit. A major author, topic, or theme of 



 English (ENGLISH) 347

eighteenth and nineteenth century literature. Satisfies the Area II requirements for English majors. Topics vary 
each semester Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-3. Special Topics in English Literature: Modern and Contemporary. A major author, topic, 
or theme of modern and contemporary literature. Satisfies Area III for the English major. Topics vary each 
semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-4. Special Topics in Creative Writing. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
299. Hip Hop and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 248; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 248, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 299
310A. The Business of Art and Media. Duke in New York. The changes experienced by print and visual 
media (book publishing, magazines, newspapers, TV, films, theatre, advertising) in the twenty-first century in 
how art and business can, and often must, be done and in how they interact with society. Examinations through 
readings (including selected case histories) and guest speakers of how technology and technological change 
affect art and society today. Satisfies Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Torgovnick. One 
course. C-L: Art History 313A, Visual and Media Studies 301A, Policy Journalism and Media
312A. The Arts in New York: A Thematic Approach. ALP, R, W Duke in New York. Various topics 
dealing with the arts in New York. Group attendance at, and subsequent seminar discussion of, performances, 
exhibitions, films, and lectures. Research or critical paper required. Open only to students admitted to the Duke 
in New York Arts Program. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Theater Studies 213A, Visual and Media Studies 259A, Public Policy 312A
313A. Internship in New York. Immersion in the professional art world through apprenticeship to 
a sponsoring artist or organization. Students spend fifteen hours per week at the internship and write a 
substantive paper containing significant analysis and interpretation of the relation of the students’ sponsoring 
institution to the art form of activity as a whole, the system of production and consumption surrounding that 
art form or activity, and the sponsor’s organizational framework, operating mechanics, and role in the creation, 
preservation, or interpretation of the art form or activity. Open only to students admitted to the Duke in New 
York Arts Program. Does not count toward the major. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Theater Studies 214A, Art History 312A, Visual and Media Studies 296A
313A-1. Internship in New York. Immersion in the professional world of the arts and media through 
working with a sponsoring artist, organization, or business. Open only to students admitted to the Duke in New 
York Arts and Media Program. Does not count toward the major. Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: 
Staff. C-L: Theater Studies 214A-1, Visual and Media Studies 296A-1, Art History 312A-1
314A. The Business of City Life. A half-credit course to help place your internship in the business of city 
life. Saturday tours of city neighborhoods (Chinatown, Harlem, Lincoln Square, Central Park) that have been 
visibly and dramatically impacted by developments in the city’s economic life and in cultural or public policy, 
with coordinated readings, lectures, and discussion. Topics to include global Chinese identity in Chinatown; 
gentrification in Harlem; non-profits and conservancies in Lincoln Square/Central Park, Disney in Times Square 
and Hell’s Kitchen. Coordinated cultural events scheduled during evening hours. Open only to students in the 
Duke in New York: Summer Internships in the City program. Instructor: Torgovnick. Half course. C-L: Theater 
Studies 215A
315SA. New York Scenes. ALP, R New York Scenes will focus on the various cultural institutions, scenes, 
establishments, happenings, hang-outs, movements, etc., that make up New York City. Early in the semester, 
students will select a particular “scene” to research over the course of the term. For example: Tin Pan Alley 
(popular music, theater), The Lafayette Theatre (black arts), St. Mark’s Church (poetry, punk rock), the Chelsea 
Hotel (mid-century writers, pop stars and outcasts), La MaMa (experimental theater), the Christopher Street 
Piers (queer history, lgbtq youth) and Union Square Park (leftist organizing history). Open to students in 
the Duke in New York program. Instructor: Taylor Black. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 218SA, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 315SA, Art History 318SA, African & African American Studies 318SA, Jewish 
Studies 315SA
316S. Playmaking: Collaboration from Page to Stage. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
380S



  English (ENGLISH)348

317S. Screenwriting. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 273S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
387S
318S. Expressing Immigrant Experience: The Russians. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Russian 
317S; also C-L: Literature 319S
319S. Narrative and Moral Crisis. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 320S
320S. Intermediate Workshop in the Writing of Poetry. ALP, W Intermediate workshops present a 
higher creative standard than introductory workshops and increased expectations in both quantity and quality 
of revised, finished work. Pre-requisite: English 110S OR English 220S, or consent of the instructor if prior work 
merits admission to the class (as judged by the instructor). Instructor: Staff. One course.
321S. Intermediate Workshop in the Writing of Fiction. ALP, W Intermediate workshops present a 
higher creative standard than introductory workshops and increased expectations in both quantity and quality 
of revised, finished work. Pre-requisite: English 110S OR English 221S, or consent of the instructor if prior work 
merits admission to the class (as judged by the instructor). Instructor: Staff. One course.
322S. Intermediate Workshop in the Writing of Creative Non-Fiction. ALP, W Intermediate 
workshops present a higher creative standard than introductory workshops and increased expectations in both 
quantity and quality of revised, finished work. Pre-requisite: English 110S OR English 222S, or consent of the 
instructor if prior work merits admission to the class (as judged by the instructor). Instructor: Staff. One course.
331S. Late Medieval Literature and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Explores a range of medieval writings 
together with the culture in which they are made. Inquiries involve the close reading of medieval texts to 
learn about medieval Christianity, ethics, politics and theology in the culture. Considers questions concerning 
relations between the medieval world and our own. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 334S
332S. Chaucer I. ALP, CCI, R The first two-thirds of his career, especially Troilus and Criseyde. Satisfies 
Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
320S
333. Chaucer II. ALP, CCI, R The Canterbury Tales. Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 321
336. Shakespeare through 1600. ALP, EI, R Examination of twelve plays by Shakespeare written before 
1600. Satisfies Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 336, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 331
337. Shakespeare After 1600. ALP, EI, R Examination of ten plays by Shakespeare written after 1600. 
Not open to students who have taken Theater Studies 239A. Satisfies Area I requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 337, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 332
338S. Milton. ALP, EI, R Poetry and its literary and social background. Satisfies Area I requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 337S
344. Eighteenth-Century British Novel. ALP, W Novels by such authors as Defoe, Richardson, Fielding, 
Smollett, and Sterne, Walpole, and Austen. Satisfies Area II requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
345. Nineteenth-Century British Novel. ALP Novels by such authors as Scott, Austen, Dickens, Thackeray, 
Trollope, the Bronte’s, George Eliot, Meredith, Collins, Hardy, and others. Satisfies Area II requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
346. Victorian Poetry. ALP Works by such poets as Tennyson, Browning, Barrett, Browning, Arnold, the 
Rossettis, Swinburn, Morris, and others. Satisfies Area II requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
350S. Law and Literature: Race Matters. CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
350S
355. Idealistic Nature: The Literature, Philosophy, and Cognition of Ecology. ALP, CZ, EI One 
course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 307; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 347, Visual and 
Media Studies 347



 English (ENGLISH) 349

362D. What Is Beauty?. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 360D; also C-L: Art History 360D, 
Literature 362D
365S. Modern Drama: 1940-2000. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 335S
371S. Studies in American Literature, WWI-WWII. ALP A seminar version of English 371. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
372S. Modern American Poetry. ALP, R Focus on twentieth-century American poets; developments in 
style, subject, voice, diversity of representation, and impact of critical methodologies on shaping American 
poetic literature. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
373. American Literature, Cold War and After. ALP American authors, topics and themes of the late 
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. Satisfies Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
373S. Studies in American Literature, Cold War and After. ALP This is a seminar version of English 
373. Instructor: Staff. One course.
374. Contemporary American Writers. ALP Novelists and poets prominent since 1984. Satisfies Area III 
requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
375S. Popular Fictions. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 345S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 252S
376S. The Detective Novel. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 379S; also C-L: Literature 379S
377. Contemporary Novel. ALP Major trends in fiction since 1950: modernism/postmodernism, ethnicity 
and ethnic identity, feminism, postcoloniality, genre-bending, and more. Readings from the United Stares 
and from Great Britain, India, Canada, South Africa, and the Caribbean. Satisfies Area III for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Literature 351, International Comparative Studies 377
377S. Contemporary Novel. ALP Seminar version of English 377. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Literature 351S, International Comparative Studies 377S
378. Beat Generation/Russian New Wave: Cultural Dissent in the Cold War. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, 
W One course. C-L: see Russian 330; also C-L: Literature 331
379S. Fictions That Mark the Moment. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 228S; also C-L: Literature 382S
380. Popular Representations of Black Masculinity. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 338; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 340
380S. James Baldwin and Toni Morrison. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 399S; also 
C-L: African & African American Studies 322S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 402S
381. The History of Hip-Hop. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 335; also 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 335, Music 335, Visual and Media Studies 337
383A. Theater in London: Text. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 239A
383AS. Theater in London: Text. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 239AS
384A. Theater in London: Performance. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 240A
384AS. Theater in London: Performance (DS4). ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 240AS
385S. Fiction/Reality: Reality Hunger in Recent Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 
303S
386. Science Fiction Film. ALP, CCI, EI, STS Science fiction film from the 1950s to the present. From 
talking apes to mind control, forbidden planets to genetic dystopias, alien invasions to travel in time and space, 
an exploration of classic films in the genre with attention to how the films imagine the relationships among 
science, politics, and society over time. Attention to visual as well as literary story telling. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Art History 238
387. Asian American Theatre. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 232; also C-L: Asian & 



  English (ENGLISH)350

Middle Eastern Studies 182
388S. Love, Marriage, Education: Theories About Women from Rousseau to Beauvoir. ALP, 
CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 365S; also C-L: Philosophy 274S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
365S
389S. American Independent Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 318S; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 373S, Visual and Media Studies 332S, Documentary Studies 322S
390-1. Special Topics: Single American Author. Area requirements for the English major (Area I, II, or 
III) to be determined by the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-2. Special Topics in a Single British Author. Studies in a single British author. Area requirements for 
English majors (Area I, II, or III) will be determined by the Dir. of Undergraduate when taught. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390-3. Special Topic in an Individual African American Author. Studies in an individual African 
American author. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 290-3
390-4. Special Topics in African American Literary Genres. Autobiography, Drama, Poetry, The Novel, 
and The Essay. Satisfies Area II or III for English majors—to be determined by the Director of Undergraduate 
Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 290-4
390-5. Special Topics in Genre. Area 1, 2, 3, or elective, to be determined by the Director of Undergraduate 
Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-6. Special Topics in Film. A lecture version of 390S-6. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English 
majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in English. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in a Single American Author. Seminar version of 390-1. Area requirements (Area 
I, II, or III) for English majors will be determined by the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390S-2. Special Topics in a Single British Author. Studies in a single British author. Area requirements 
for English majors (Areas I, II, or III) determined by the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390S-6. Special Topics in Film. A major genre, period, or director. Satisfies the Area III requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-7. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Area requirements for majors to be determined by 
the Director of Undergraduate Studies in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391A. Duke in New York Arts and Media Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study 
on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a Duke faculty member, resulting in a substantive 
paper containing significant analysis and interpretation. Open only to students in the Duke in New York Arts 
and Media Program. Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and 
Media
395. Language and Society. CCI, SS Course examines language as a social practice, focusing on different 
aspects of its role in social life. Topics addressed include: language and social identity, such as ethnicity, 
social class, age, and gender; variation in language, including dialects, accents, and registers; multilingualism 
and language contact; new languages such as pidgins and creoles; language, culture, and intercultural 
communication; language and ideology; language in education and in the media. Through the discussion of 
these topics and homework including reading and small research projects, students are introduced to key 
concepts, theories, and methods in sociolinguistics and linguistic anthropology. Instructor: staff. One course. 
C-L: Linguistics 451, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 385, Cultural Anthropology 212, International Comparative 
Studies 395, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 395, Human Rights
396S. Language in Immigrant America. ALP, CCI, R Discussion of issues of language in the context of 
immigration in the United States, from the turn of the 20th century until the present, combining approaches 



 English (ENGLISH) 351

from literature, memoirs, language policy, media studies, and linguistic anthropology. Some fieldwork in an 
immigrant community. Topics include: identity, assimilation, race, bilingual communities, bilingual education, 
foreign accents, language contact. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 397S, Linguistics 
396S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 396S, International Comparative Studies 396S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 396S, Human Rights
397S. Narratives of Migration. ALP, CCI, R Stories of migration captivate us because they touch on 
universally important themes: home, family, belonging, identity, pain, loss. In this course, we will explore 
narratives, or stories, of migration, as told by refugees and immigrants from across the world, through different 
media: written, spoken, photographed, and constructed digitally on social media. This course approaches 
narratives of migration primarily from the perspective of sociocultural linguistics and discourse analysis, but 
we will refer to other scholarly traditions as well. This is a Service-Learning course: students will engage in a 
mentoring relationship with an immigrant student in a Durham high school. Instructor: Baran. One course. C-L: 
Linguistics 397S, Cultural Anthropology 330S, International Comparative Studies 330S
398. Digital Media Internship. Experience producing digital content for departmental use. Editor-peer 
mentorship introduces journalistic practices in writing and photography. Writing intensive. Consent of 
instructor is required. Instructor: Sussman. Half course.
420S. Advanced Workshop in the Writing of Poetry. ALP, W Advanced Writing Workshops build on 
the work done at the intermediate level, and are intended for the most well-prepared and gifted creative writing 
students. Pre-requisite: English 320S or consent of the instructor if prior work merits admission to the class (as 
judged by the instructor). Instructor: Staff. One course.
421S. Advanced Workshop in the Writing of Fiction. ALP, W Advanced Writing Workshops build 
on work done at intermediate level, and are intended for the most well-prepared and gifted creative writing 
students. Pre-requisite: English 321S or consent of the instructor if prior work merits admission to the class (as 
judged by the instructor). Instructor: Staff. One course.
480S. Understanding Mediation. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Literature 325S; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 316S, Theater Studies 249S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 325S, Documentary Studies 
358S
482S. Studies in Contemporary Theory. ALP Topics included: psychoanalysis, Marxism, Structuralism, 
Post-Structuralism, theory of film and the image; theory of race, gender, sexuality, with a concentration on 
materials since 1950. Satisfies the criticism, theory, methodology (CTM) for English majors. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
485S. Ordinary Language Philosophy. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 486S; also C-L: Philosophy 
486S
490. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Area requirements (Area I, II, III) to be determined by 
the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490-1. Current Topics in Linguistics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490-7. Special Topics in Literature and the Other Arts. Selected topics in the study of the interrelation 
of literature and other art forms. Area requirements (Area I, II, III) for English majors will be determined by the 
Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Language and Literature. Seminar version of 173. Area requirements (Area I, II, 
III) will be determined by the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S-1. Special Topics in Linguistics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S-10. Special Topics in Criticism, Theory, or Methodology. Satisfies the Criticism, Theory, or 
Methodology (CTM) for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S-2. Special Topics in African American Literary Studies. Topics may change each semester. 
Satisfies Area II or III requirement for English majors. To be determined by the Director of Undergraduate 
Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490T. Tutorial (Area I, II, or III as determined by instructor). Tutorials under the supervision of a 
faculty member for two or more students working on related independent projects. Consent of instructor and 



  English (ENGLISH)352

director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual non-research creative writing project directed study in a field of special 
interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic 
and/or artistic product. Open to juniors and seniors. Consent of both the instructor and the director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to juniors and seniors. Consent of both the 
instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Distinction Creative Writing Independent Study. Open to those whose thesis will be in the field 
of creative writing. Application and consent of the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
496. Distinction Creative Writing Independent Study. Open to those whose thesis will be in the field 
of creative writing. Application and consent of the Director of Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
497. Distinction Critical Research Independent Study. R Open to those whose thesis will be a critical 
paper or piece of other research (for example, in linguistics). Application and consent of the Director of 
Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
498. Distinction Critical Research Independent Study. R Open to those whose thesis will be a critical 
paper or piece of other research (for example, in linguistics). Application and consent of the Director of 
Undergraduate Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
505. Introduction to Old English. ALP An introduction to the language of the Anglo-Saxon period (700-
1100), with readings in representative prose and poetry. Not open to students who have taken 113A or the 
equivalent. Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 605
520S. Writing Poetry: Formal and Dramatic Approaches. ALP, W A workshop comparing meter, 
stanza, and rhyme with free verse, to illuminate the freedom and form of all poetry. Narrative and conceptual 
content considered within the poem’s emotive, musical dynamic. Group discussion of technique, personal 
aesthetic and creative process; revisions of poems. Instructor: Staff. One course.
522S. Narrative Writing. ALP, W The writing of short stories, memoirs, tales, and other narrations. 
Readings from ancient and modern narrative. Close discussion of frequent submissions by class members. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
530S. Special Topics in Middle English Literature: 1100 to 1500. Selected topics. Satisfies Area I 
requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 690S-1
532S. Chaucer and His Contexts. ALP, CCI, R The first two-thirds of his career, especially Troilus and 
Criseyde. Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 625S
536S. Shakespeare: Special Topics. ALP, R Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 630S
537S. Shakespeare & Co.: English Renaissance Drama. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Interrogates drama of 
Marlowe, Shakespeare, Jonson, and Middleton, and other playwrights from only the second time in world 
history when the genre conducts a culture’s dominant intellectual currents. Umbrella questions: ethnicity, 
proto-feminism, sexual orientation, secularism, aesthetic-commercial rivalry, mercuriality, Shakespearean 
exceptionalism. In addition to edited play-texts we will also use major new electronic resources. Grade based 
equally on class discussion and a twenty-page essay. Instructor: Porter. Variable credit. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 637S
538S. Special Topics in Renaissance Prose and Poetry: 1500 to 1660. ALP, R Selected topics. 
Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 632S



 English (ENGLISH) 353

539S. Special Topics in Seventeenth-Century Literature. ALP, R Topics vary by semester. Satisfies the 
Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
540. Special Topics in Restoration and Eighteenth-Century Literature. ALP Satisfies the Area II 
requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
540S. Special Topics in Restoration and Eighteenth-Century Literature (DS3). ALP Seminar 
version of English 540. Instructor: Staff. One course.
545S. Romantic Literature: 1790 to 1830. ALP Selected topics. Satisfies the Area II requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
546. Special Topics in Victorian Literature. ALP Selected topics. Satisfies the Area II requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
546S. Special Topics in Victorian Literature. ALP, R, W Satisfies the Area II requirement for English 
majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
550S. British Literature since 1900. ALP Selected topics. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English 
majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
560. American Literature to 1820 (Selected Topics). ALP Selected Topics. Satisfies the Area II 
requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
580S. Music in Literature and Philosophy. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see German 580S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 527S
581S. Mimesis in Theory, Embodied Practice, and Literary Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: 
see French 507S; also C-L: Art History 509S, Literature 507S
582S. Wittgensteinian Perspectives on Literary Theory. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 681S; also 
C-L: Philosophy 681S
583. Theater in London: Text. One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 520A
584. Theater in London: Performance. One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 540A
590-1. Special Topics I. Subjects, areas or themes that cut across historical eras, several national literatures, 
or genres, medieval to early modern periods. Satisfies the Area I requirement for English majors. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
590-2. Special Topics II. Subjects, areas or themes that cut across historical eras, several national literatures, 
or genres, eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. Satisfies Area II requirement for English majors. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
590-3. Special Topics III. Subjects, areas or themes that cut across historical eras, several national 
literatures, or genres,1860-Present. Satisfies Area III requirement for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
590-4. Special Topics in Criticism. Satisfies the Criticism, Methodology, Theory (CTM) requirement for 
English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies. Satisfies English Area 
or Criticism and Methodology requirements for the English major as determined by Director of Undergraduate 
Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-1. Special Topics Seminar I. Subjects, areas or themes that cut across historical eras, several national 
literatures, or genres, medieval and early modern period. Satisfies Area I requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-2. Special Topics Seminar II. Subjects, areas or themes that cut across historical eras, several 
national literatures, or genres. Satisfies Area II requirement for English majors. Topics course. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
590S-3. Special Topics Seminar III. Subjects, areas or themes that cut across historical eras, several 
national literatures, or genres, 1860 to the present. Satisfies the Area III requirement for English majors. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



  English (ENGLISH)354

590S-4. Special Topics Seminar in Criticism, Theory, or Methodology. Seminar Version of 288. 
Satisfies the Criticism, Theory, or Methodology (CTM) for English majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
591. Special Readings - Independent Study. Independent study. Department consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
620S. Film-philosophers/Film-makers. ALP, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 620S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 622S, Theater Studies 620S, Documentary Studies 620S
691S. Black Sonic Culture—Analog to Digital. One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
622S; also C-L: Literature 691S, Music 691S

The Major
The English major is designed to convey to students a broad knowledge of English, American, and Anglophone 

literature, a sophisticated habit of critically engaging literary and cultural texts, a shared understanding of major 
problems, trends, and methods of literary and cultural analysis, and the ability to pose questions and organize 
knowledge in productive and original ways. While offering students clear direction on how to profit most from 
their study within the English department, the major also seeks to encourage students to assume an enduring 
habit of questioning and intellectual self-articulation. Each of the four areas of requirement for completion of the 
major thus invites students, in consultation with their advisor, to devise a coherent, challenging, and intellectually 
distinctive plan of study.

Requirements
Ten courses, nine of which must be at the 200 level or above. Required courses include one gateway course; 

four area study courses; one criticism, theory, or methodology course; and four electives, as follows:
Gateway Course. Students must select one section of English 101S (The Art of Reading), and complete it 

ideally in their sophomore year and no later than the end of the junior year.
Each student must take at least nine additional courses at the 200 level or above. Five of these courses must 

satisfy the following requirements:
Diversified Study. Students must select at least two courses in the medieval and early modern area (Area 

I), at least one in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries area (Area II), and at least one course in the modern to 
contemporary area (Area III), as outlined below. Courses must be chosen from more than one national literature. 
Courses that appear in more than one area of study may only count for one designated area as determined by 
instructor.

• Area I (Medieval and Early Modern); two courses required
• Area II (Eighteenth and Nineteenth Centuries); one course required
• Area III (Modern to Contemporary); one course required
Criticism, Theory, Methodology (CTM). Students must select one course on criticism, theory, or 

methodology. Some courses to satisfy CTM are English 204, 395, 396, 480S, 482S, 490S-10—in addition, other 
English courses designated as CTM will be posted on the English website each semester. 

Recommendations 
1. Students should take at least one course focused on minority literatures or Anglophone literatures from 

beyond the United States and Great Britain. The department offer courses in African, Asian, Caribbean, 
diasporic, and ethnic literatures (e.g., African American, Asian American) that will broaden students’ 
perspectives on English as a global language.  

2. Students planning to enter graduate study in an English department should take additional courses 
from the early as well as later and modern periods. If eligible, they should also apply for the Distinction 
Program. Aspiring graduate students should consult their advisor.

The Minor

Minor in English
Requirements. Five courses at or above the 200 level; or English 101S plus four courses at or above the 

200 level. One of the 200 level courses must be a designated seminar. Only one of the five courses may be taken at 
an institution other than Duke. Advanced Placement credits and courses taken on a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory 



 English (ENGLISH) 355

grading basis may not be used.

Foreign Languages
The department recommends that students majoring in English complete at least two years of college-level 

study, or the equivalent, of a foreign language. Students contemplating graduate work in English should note that 
many master’s programs require examination in one foreign language and that doctoral programs commonly 
require examination in two. Students interested in linguistics are strongly urged to study at least one non-Indo-
European language.

Teacher Certification
Each year a number of Duke English majors earn certificates as secondary school teachers. While licensed 

by the state of North Carolina, these majors are essentially certified for other states, as well. Also, such training 
is urged for those who consider teaching in independent schools, since most private or parochial schools would 
prefer candidates who have earned teaching certificates.

Such certification may be gained as part of the English major and is not as time-consuming as is sometimes 
believed. Candidates should have a solid background in both American and British literature; also helpful are 
courses in composition and cultural studies. Among the requirements are one course in linguistics (English 396S, 
204, 206, or 395), an appropriate course in psychology, and several courses in education.

The last semester of the senior year is devoted to the student teaching block, including two special, accelerated 
courses and ten weeks of full-time teaching and observation in the schools, working with a mentor teacher and 
with Duke faculty. This experience leads to an English teaching certificate to accompany the bachelor’s degree.

Anyone considering secondary school English teaching should confer with the director of secondary school 
teacher preparation in the Program in Education as soon as possible. 

Minor in Creative Writing
Five courses are required for the creative writing minor:
• English 110S (Introduction to Creative Writing);
• Two courses in creative writing at the 200 level or above;
• One course at the 300 level or above; and 
• An additional course in English, other than creative writing, at the 200 level or above, in a literary 

genre appropriate to the student’s emphasis;
or
• Three courses in creative writing at the 200 level or above;
• One course at the 300 level or above; and
• An additional course in English in a literary genre appropriate to the student’s emphasis.
Note: For English majors, two courses will be allowed to overlap.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The English department offers its majors two options to earn distinction: the Critical Thesis option or the 

Creative Writing Thesis option.
Structure. Either two independent studies or a “home seminar” and one independent study. (This may be 

fall/spring or spring/fall.) Under most circumstances, a completed length of thirty-five to seventy pages.
Coursework. The distinction courses count toward the major. Students must complete eleven total courses 

to graduate with distinction in the major instead of the standard ten.
Application. To apply students must have completed, by the beginning of the senior year, at least five 

200-level or above English courses and must have a GPA of at least 3.5 in English courses. 
Students submit an application that includes a writing sample of about ten pages from an English course, 

one letter of recommendation from an English faculty member, and a project description and basic bibliography 
(one page single-spaced). Applications must be submitted to the director of undergraduate studies. Applications 
are due November 15 for a spring-to-fall option and March 15 for a fall-to-spring option. 

Evaluation Procedure. Upon approval by the instructor, the completed thesis is submitted to the director 
of undergraduate studies by December 1 (for a spring-to-fall project) or March 31 (for a fall-to-spring project) of 
the senior year for evaluation by the director of undergraduate studies, the thesis advisor, and one other faculty 
member. Please deliver three spiral-bound copies to Allen 303AA.



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)356

Levels of Distinction. Three levels: Distinction, High Distinction, or Highest Distinction. Levels of 
distinction are based on the quality of the completed work. Students who have done satisfactory work in the 
seminar or independent study but whose thesis is denied distinction will simply receive graded credit for their 
seminars and/or independent studies. Whereas the standard major in English asks for a total of ten courses, 
students pursuing honors in English will take nine courses plus either two independent studies or a “home 
seminar” to be followed by an independent study. 

Environmental Sciences and Policy Program 
Professor Kasibhatla, Director of Undergraduate Studies

Two majors are offered within the program, leading to either the bachelor of arts degree or the bachelor of 
science degree within Trinity College of Arts & Sciences. A concentration in marine science and conservation for 
majors and a minor in environmental science and policy are also offered.

Environmental Sciences and Policy (AB Degree)
The undergraduate major in environmental science and policy is offered as a bachelor of arts degree to 

students interested in the interdisciplinary study of environmental issues. The major draws from the breadth 
of perspectives from, science, policy, and humanities while engaging students in an in-depth study in natural 
or social sciences. This major is designed for students with career objectives such as environmental law, 
policy, science, management, or planning that require in-depth understanding of environmental issues that 
cross disciplinary boundaries. The corequisites for the AB degree stress a firm foundation in basic natural, 
environmental, and social science areas. The gateway course focuses on local, regional, and global case studies 
taught by interdisciplinary teams of faculty. The major requirements include three topical courses selected from 
three categories (Environmental Humanities, Environmental Sciences, and Environmental Policy) and three 
additional focus area courses. Students are required to participate in a relevant field experience or internship 
and many students choose to fulfill this requirement through study abroad, a semester at Duke Marine Lab, or 
the Stanback Internship Program. The department encourages all students to pursue independent research with 
Nicholas School faculty members.

Environmental Sciences (BS Degree)
The undergraduate major in environmental sciences is offered as a bachelor of science degree to students 

interested in a scientific perspective on environmental issues. The major is designed to expose students to the 
breadth of environmental sciences, while engaging students to develop depth in a focus area. This major is 
designed for students with career objectives in environmental sciences, industry, or management that require a 
strong scientific background, or for students intending to pursue graduate degrees in environmental sciences. The 
major also merges well with pre-health requirements. The corequisites for the BS degree stress a firm foundation 
in the physical and life sciences, and mathematics. The gateway course focuses on local, regional, and global case 
studies taught by interdisciplinary teams of faculty. The major requirements include five core courses selected 
from five categories (Environmental Health, Ecology, Environmental Physical Sciences, Environmental Social 
Science, and Environmental Tools and Skills) and three focus area courses (one of which can be a core course). 
Students are required to participate in a relevant field experience or internship and many students choose to fulfill 
this requirement through study abroad, a semester at Duke Marine Lab, or the Stanback Internship Program. 
The department encourages all students to pursue independent research with Nicholas School faculty members. 

Courses in Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Introduction to Environmental Sciences and Policy. NS, STS An introduction to the study of 
environmental sciences and policy through exploration of basic environmental principles in the life, physical, 
and social sciences. Emphasis on understanding how the atmosphere, hydrosphere, lithosphere, cryosphere, and 
biosphere function, and how these spheres interact with human consumption, production, and technological 
patterns and processes. Field trips to a local site as well as the Duke University Marine Laboratory. Instructor: 
Vidra or Wernegreen. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation, Energy and the Environment



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 357

147. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 148; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 244, Jewish Studies 148, Public Policy 178, Political 
Science 159, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 148, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies, 
Human Rights
148FS. Genomics of Host-Microbe Interactions: The Symbiotic Web. NS, R, STS Genomic insights 
into the astonishingly diverse microbial world, including microbes that interact with hosts in beneficial and 
harmful ways. Dominance of microbes in our own bodies, which contain 10 times more bacterial cells than 
human cells and 150 times more bacterial genes than human genes. Understanding how microbial interactions 
have impacted life’s history, genome evolution, ecology, and human health. Factors that dictate trajectories 
toward parasitism versus mutualism, how microbial symbionts respond to environmental change, molecular 
and cellular mechanisms of homeostasis. Readings will focus on primary articles. Open only to students in the 
Focus Program. Instructor: Wernegreen, Lutzoni. One course. C-L: Biology 148FS, Genome Sciences and Policy 
148FS
153. Climate, Coffee, and Coronavirus: Why Ecology Matters to Human Health. EI, NS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Biology 153; also C-L: Global Health 153, Global Health
155. Principles of Economics and the Environment. EI, SS, STS Teaches basic economic literacy 
and introduces environmental and natural resource issues through the lens of economics. Analyzes incentives 
and decisions of individuals, firms, and governments and how they interact with the natural environment. 
Examples include a consumer deciding to purchase organic produce, a firm deciding to install pollution control 
technology, a government choosing to regulate a carcinogenic chemical, and group of nations deciding to 
regulate greenhouse gas emissions. Stresses command of economic reasoning and analytical tools as ways to 
understand why people and governments do what they do and how policies might better address the needs of 
society. Instructor: Smith. One course.
175LA. Marine Biology. EI, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 175LA; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine 
Science and Conservation
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and 
Policy. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Topics in Environment. Topics vary semester to semester. Only open to students in the Focus 
Program. Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Content to be determined each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
201. Integrating Environmental Sciences and Policy. NS, SS, STS Interaction between the natural and 
the social systems as they relate to the environment. Focus on ecological and earth system cycles, processes, 
and fundamental relationships. The environmental impact of human-induced change at the local, regional, and 
global levels. The role of technology and the policy process in determining how environmental problems evolve 
and are addressed. Use of ethical analysis to evaluate environmental tradeoffs. Use of case studies to integrate 
multiple disciplinary perspectives on environmental problems and to address issues of environmental justice. 
Prerequisite: Environment 102 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Pan, Clark, or Wernegreen. One course. C-L: 
Marine Science and Conservation
205. Marine Megafauna. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 205; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine 
Science and Conservation
209. Food, Farming, and Feminism. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 275; also C-L: Global Health 225, History 221
210D. Conserving the Variety of Life on Earth. NS, SS An overview of biological diversity, its patterns, 
and the current extinction crisis. Historical and theoretical foundations of conservation, from human values 
and law to criteria and frameworks for setting conservation priorities; island biogeography theory, landscape 
ecology, and socioeconomic considerations in reserve design; management of endangered species in the wild 
and in captivity; managing protected areas for long term viability of populations; the role of the landscape 
matrix around protected areas; and techniques for conserving biological diversity in semi-wild productive 
ecosystems such as forests. Instructor: Pimm. One course.



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)358

212. United States Environmental Policy. EI, SS, STS, W An overview of the major environmental 
legislation in the United States. Topics include: air and water pollution, hazardous waste, agriculture, wildlife, 
and institutions. Political, economic, ethical, and scientific analysis. Open to juniors or seniors or by consent 
of instructor. Instructor: Albright. One course. C-L: Public Policy 275, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 213, Marine Science and Conservation, Energy and the Environment
214S. Ethical Challenges in Environmental Conservation. EI, SS, W Examination of current ethical 
challenges in environmental conservation. Topics include the philosophical basis and challenges of mankind’s 
responsibility to the natural world; prioritization of often conflicting conservation efforts; balancing the needs 
of humans and the environment; the disputed role of scientists as advocates; and the philosophical and political 
obstacles to conservation efforts. Analysis of the evolving environmental movement, in relation to current 
issues. Instructor: Vidra. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 214S, Marine 
Science and Conservation
216S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding. 
CCI, EI, SS, W Environmental and natural resources as a source of conflict and/or peacebuilding between 
and within nations and states. Analysis of the role of the environment in the conflict cycle and international 
security. Topics include refugees, climate change, water, and infectious disease. Particular focus on post-conflict 
and rebuilding in war-torn societies. Examination of the role of international organizations, non-governmental 
organizations, and emerging standards for environmental management. Examples drawn from conflicts such 
as Rwanda, Israel/Palestine, Nepal, Sierra Leone and others. Instructor: Weinthal. One course. C-L: Public 
Policy 279S, Political Science 367S, International Comparative Studies 229S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 229S, Islamic Studies, Marine Science and Conservation, Human Rights
217. Restoration Ecology: Theory and Applications. EI, NS, STS, W Addresses fundamental 
principles of ecological restoration. Includes an overview of the discipline, scientific, ethical and philosophical 
underpinnings, and the legislative framework that guides much of the restoration work in the United States. 
Principles of ecosystem ecology introduced to provide an understanding of ecosystem processes across 
landscapes and within specific restoration sites. Students will conduct a comparative study of a restoration 
site with a reference site and work in small groups to create a monitoring report for this site. Prerequisite: 
introductory biology or environmental science, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Vidra. One course.
222S. Environmental Conservation and Documentary Photography. ALP, EI, R Technical and 
aesthetic training in creating documentaries to communicate critical environmental issues so as to affect societal 
change. History of the essential role of documentary photography in land conservation, social justice, and 
protection of biodiversity from the early 1800’s to today leads into individual documentary projects. Studio, 
seminar, study of photography in university archives and field trips. Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: 
Satterwhite. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 248S, Marine Science and Conservation, Human Rights
223. Environment and Global Capitalism in Latin America. CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 
222; also C-L: Latin American Studies 222, Latin American Studies
226S. Field Methods in Earth and Environmental Sciences. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Earth and 
Ocean Sciences 226S
228. Food and Fuel for a Growing Population: Nuts and Bolts of Plant Growth and Production. 
NS, STS Covers primary physiological processes from subcellular to whole plant that affect plant growth 
in a changing environment. Processes include photosynthesis, respiration, water relations, nutrient and 
carbohydrate allocation, signaling, and stress responses to various biotic and abiotic factors for a range of 
plant species adapted to different environments. Applications include plant improvement for food and biofuel 
production, management of plant growth in response to global change. Local field trip planned. Recommended 
prerequisite: Biology 201L, 202L, or 203L. Instructor: Reid. One course. C-L: Biology 228
228S. Food and Fuel for a Growing Population: Nuts and Bolts of Plant Growth and Production. 
NS, STS Covers primary physiological processes from subcellular to whole plant that affect plant growth 
in a changing environment. Processes include photosynthesis, respiration, water relations, nutrient and 
carbohydrate allocation, signaling, and stress responses to various biotic and abiotic factors for a range of 
plant species adapted to different environments. Applications include plant improvement for food and biofuel 
production, management of plant growth in response to global change. Offered through the DukeImmerse 
program. Will include travel to farms in NC locally, to the mountains, and to the coast. Recommended 



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 359

prerequisite: Biology 201L, 202L, or 203L. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Reid. One course. C-L: 
Biology 228S
231. Energy and the Environment. NS, SS, STS Overview of the challenges confronting humanity 
as a consequence of our reliance on energy. Challenges include dwindling supplies, rising demand and 
environmental degradation. Realistic responses require an understanding of the complexity of the energy 
system, including energy resources, uses, and impacts, in the context of social, political and economic 
imperatives. Lectures will be augmented by presentations from guest speakers from industry, government and 
non-profit organizations. Instructor: Pratson. One course. C-L: Earth and Ocean Sciences 231, Energy 231
239. Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry: From Air Pollution to Climate Change. NS, 
STS Integrated scientific background for the impact of humans on the natural environment. Topics covered 
include greenhouse gases and climate, local and regional ozone pollution, long-range pollution transport, acid 
rain, atmospheric particulate matter pollution, and stratospheric ozone depletion. Prerequisite: Chemistry 
101DL. Instructor: Kasibhatla. One course. C-L: Earth and Ocean Sciences 239
240S. Biodiversity Issues and Field Methods. NS, R, STS Biodiversity is affected by many factors, both 
local and global, including climate and climate change, fire regimes, habitat fragmentation, and urbanization. 
These issues and others will be covered through readings, discussions, and field research. Explores and assesses 
local biodiversity through field exercises and field trips with emphasis on local flora and fauna identification. 
Applies field techniques to monitor, compare, and evaluate local communities for biodiversity in both urban and 
rural settings and their interface. Complements Environment 226, 210, and 217. Instructor: Staff. One course.
245. The Theory and Practice of Sustainability. EI, NS, R, SS, STS Theories and practices of 
sustainability explored with application to the campus environment, including economic, social and 
environmental factors, and a local to global reach. The Duke campus is used as a case study to illustrate 
institutional practices including building design and operations, utility supply and consumption, carbon offsets 
design and calculation, transportation, water, sustainability education and communication, behavior change, 
waste production and recycling, and procurement. In a service-learning project, students might perform 
sustainability inventories and cost/benefit analyses, or gather behavior change data. Instructor: Clark. One 
course. C-L: Sustainability Engagement 245, Energy and the Environment
265. Environmental Law and Policy. SS Legal principles governing environmental problems in the United 
States, including endangered species, hazardous waste, air pollution. Introduction to the overarching topics 
in law and in regulatory design that shape the contributions and roles law plays in solutions to environmental 
problems. Instructor: Staff. One course.
268. Examining the Ethics of Engaging in Environmental Professions. EI Examines internship 
experience in context of personal, professional and environmental ethics. Marries internship experience with 
critical engagement with peer-reviewed literature, academic texts, essays, videos, and podcasts. Students engage 
in reflective conversations with co-workers and peers to practice weighing evidence, synthesizing research, 
articulating own perspective through writing and revising. Employs written reflection to examine lessons 
learned through internship experience and enhance transfer of lessons to new situations. Online course available 
only in summer. Department consent required. Instructor: Vidra. One course.
269T-1. Voices in the Environment: Spanish. In this course, students will explore how language and 
culture impact environmental policy and practice. Through authentic text, video, and case studies in Spanish, 
students will analyze environmental issues in Latin America to develop their understanding of core issues in the 
field. Tutorials meet for 75 minutes/week. Taught in Spanish. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Spanish 272T-1
269T-2. Voices in the Environment: French. In this course, students will explore how language and 
culture impact environmental policy and practice. Through authentic text, video, and case studies in French, 
students will analyze environmental issues in the Francophone World to develop their understanding of core 
issues in the field. Tutorials meet for 75 minutes/week. Taught in French. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: 
French 272T
269T-3. Voices in the Environment: Mandarin. In this course, students will explore how language and 
culture impact environmental policy and practice. Through authentic text, video, and case studies in Mandarin, 
students will analyze environmental issues in the Francophone World to develop their understanding of core 
issues in the field. Tutorials meet for 75 minutes/week. Taught in Mandarin. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: 



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)360

Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 272T
270A. Conservation Biology and Policy. EI, NS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Biology 270A; also C-L: 
Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
271A. Biology for Engineers: Informing Engineering Decisions. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 
275A; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 272A; also C-L: Earth and Ocean 
Sciences 272A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
273LA. Marine Ecology. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Biology 273LA; also C-L: Earth and Ocean Sciences 
374LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
274. People, Plants and Pollution: Introduction to Urban Environments. NS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Biology 262
275SA. Global Fisheries Conflicts: Exploring Local and Global Economic, Ecological, and Social 
Impacts. EI, SS, STS Interdisciplinary investigation of fisheries management. Theoretical and practical 
policy questions regarding resource allocation measures (e.g., quota systems, marine protected areas, seasonal 
closures, and gear restrictions) and place-specific conflicts (e.g., over space, regulatory measures, cultural 
meanings, and livelihoods). Evaluation of fisheries science and examination of economic, ecological, and social 
ramifications of different management scenarios. Broad overview of the state of fisheries and fishing practices 
around the globe; in-depth analysis of local science and policy conflicts. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
276. Denial, Faith, Reason: Sustainability and Survival. EI One course. C-L: see Public Policy 284; also 
C-L: Study of Ethics 285, Economics 285, History 325, Sustainability Engagement 276
277A. Biodiversity of Alaska. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 287A; also C-L: Earth and Ocean 
Sciences 287A
278LA. Comparative Physiology of Marine Animals. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Biology 278LA; 
also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
280LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics. NS, R, STS Fundamentals of 
marine bioacoustics with a focus on current literature and conservation issues. Topics include: introduction to 
acoustics; acoustic analysis methods and quantitative tools; production and recording of sound; ocean noise; 
propagation theory; active and passive acoustics; hearing, sound production and communication in marine 
organisms, potential impacts of anthropogenic noise; and regulation of marine sound. Labs will focus on 
methodologies used for generating, recording and analyzing marine sounds. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. Prerequisite: AP Biology, introductory biology, or consent of instructor; Physics 141L or 164L (or equivalent 
Physics courses) or consent of instructor. Instructor: Nowacek. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 384LA, Earth and Ocean Sciences 280LA, Biology 279LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and 
Conservation
286A. Marine Policy. EI, SS, STS Policy and policy-making concerning the coastal marine environment. 
History of marine-related organizations, legislation, and issues and their effects on local, regional, national, and 
international arenas. Use of theoretical and methodological perspectives, including political science, sociology, 
and economics. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Murray. One course. C-L: Public Policy 
281A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
287A. Marine Conservation Service-Learning Course: Challenges at Sea. NS, STS Introduction 
to marine conservation biology emphasizing community outreach at local middle schools. Material focuses 
on issues in marine conservation and how they are addressed. Lectures cover principles of conservation, 
biodiversity, extinction risks, genetic tools, fishery by-catch, over-exploitation, habitat degradation, invasive 
species, climate change, and marine protected areas. Based on class discussions, students will develop and teach 
activities that address local conservation topics for middle school students. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. Recommended prerequisite: introductory biology. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, 
Marine Science and Conservation
288A. Biogeography in an Australian Context. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 288A; also C-L: 
Earth and Ocean Sciences 288A



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 361

290. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Content to be determined each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Environmental Sciences 
and Policy. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Same as Environment 290 but taught as a 
seminar. Instructor: Staff. One course.
305SA. Social Impact Analysis. EI, SS Course covers theoretical, methodological and applied aspects 
of social impact analysis. Students will think sociologically about environmental issues and social impacts 
they create. Course reviews key US policies and guidelines that require and inform social impact analysis. 
Students will understand and critique key methods and approaches used in social impact analysis to generate 
inclusive decisions that protect the environment and health of human communities that share its abundance 
and meaning. Course will compare and critique a range of national and international social impact examples, 
including ethical issues associated with the non-human world. Consent of instructor is required. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Murray. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
307A. Barrier Island Ecology, Geology, and Policy. NS, STS An integration of barrier island ecology 
with coastal physical processes and geomorphological change. Management and policy relating to impacts of 
human interference with natural processes including climate change are emphasized. Students conduct original 
research, which includes data collection in the field and lab processing, to produce a final report. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Classes and research at both UNC Institute of Marine Sciences (IMS) in Morehead 
City and nearby Duke University Marine Labs (DUML) in Beaufort so as to maximize field site access to the 
iconic Outer Banks chain of barrier islands. Prerequisite: a course in ecology or geology or permission of the 
instructor. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Rodriguez, Fegley, Peterson. One course. C-L: Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
308A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health. CCI, NS, STS Students will gain a grounding in 
marine sciences which will help them to evaluate impacts of anthropogenic activities on both marine ecosystems 
and the humans that rely on them. After developing an understanding of the issues facing environmental and 
human health and well-being in marine systems, students will travel to Duke Kunshan University in China, to 
better understand environmental challenges facing a rapidly developing economy. This course will embrace 
immersive field experiences in both North Carolina and China that will contextualize classroom learning as well 
as develop connections with environmental practitioners and residents. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Duke Immerse course. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Hunt. One course. C-L: Global Health 308A, 
Biology 308A
309A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health. NS, STS Focus on the concept of “One Health” 
that the health of the environment and the people who live in it are linked. The basis (from a biological 
perspective) of threats facing the marine environment and interactions between environmental and human 
health and their role in global health disparities. For example, in discussing fisheries and aquaculture, the course 
will cover environmental impacts of these extractive industries and their importance in human and societal well-
being. This course will embrace immersive field experiences in North Carolina that will contextualize classroom 
learning and develop connections with practitioners and residents. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Hunt. One course. C-L: Global Health 309A, Biology 309A, Marine Sciences
310. Forest Measurements. NS This course aims to familiarize students with the field and analytic 
measurement skills expected of professionals in forest ecosystem management. In this course, we consider 
techniques for measuring forest characteristics at three different scales: individual plant, forest stand, and 
landscape. These techniques require the use of traditional forestry instruments (e.g., clinometers, Biltmore 
sticks) and contemporary handheld GPS units. This course heavily emphasizes field activities and quantitative 
skills. Recommended prerequisite: Environment 311 (Dendrology, past or concurrent) and/or instructor 
consent. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Cagle. One course.
311. Dendrology. NS This course aims to familiarize students with the secret lives of trees. We begin by 
learning to identify over 130 woody plants of the Piedmont. To do this, we will also grapple with dichotomous 
keys and plant systematics to help us identify plants anywhere in the world. We also address topics like the 
chemical communication of trees, the relationships among wildlife and trees, and the value of trees. Most of this 
course will be outside. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Cagle. One course.



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)362

314. Managing the Oceans to Solve Global Problems. EI, SS This course highlights the importance of 
the oceans in addressing central development and environmental problems facing the world, including poverty, 
hunger, access to energy, climate change, and biodiversity loss. The fundamental role the oceans could play 
in helping to solve these problems depends on public policies created to manage them. The course will expose 
students to the important laws and policies that make the resources and services provided by the ocean resilient 
and sustainable, and explore challenges of protecting corals, regulating fishing and pollution, and helping 
climate refugees. Instructor: Roady. One course. C-L: Public Policy 314, Marine Science and Conservation
315S. Environmental Issues & the Documentary Arts. ALP Survey how filmmakers, authors, 
photographers, and other artists have brought environmental issues to the public’s attention in the last century, 
and in some cases instigated profound societal and political change. Examine the nebulous distinctions 
between persuasion and propaganda, agenda and allegory, point of view and content. Evolve as a viewer 
of the environment and a maker of documentary art. Initiate your own projects to address and/or depict 
environmental issues in one form of a broad range of media. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary 
Studies 315S, Visual and Media Studies 309S
319A. Aquaculture and the Environment. NS, STS, W The major environmental, social and economic 
drivers of increasing global aquaculture, with a focus on marine systems. Quantitative evaluation and 
comparison of the range of species for aquaculture, locations where operations occur, operational aspects 
including environmental impacts and management considerations. Investigation of alternative approaches 
and potential future areas for aquaculture expansion as well as social, economic and technical barriers to 
implementation. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Johnson. One course.
320. Planetary Health: Ecosystems, Human Health and Policy. NS, SS, STS Planetary health focuses 
on human health impacts of anthropogenic disruptions of Earth’s natural systems. Examines interplay of 
human activity, environmental changes, human health impacts, and policy interventions. Topics include climate 
change, loss of biodiversity, urbanization, global pollution, and changing food systems. Uses a social justice 
perspective to understand which communities and populations are most vulnerable to disruptions of natural 
systems. Examines evidence on effective policy responses. Explores real world case studies and solutions. 
Instructor: Kramer. One course. C-L: Global Health 320
321A. Coastal Watershed Science and Policy. NS, STS Examination of coastal watersheds, their 
biological function, and how anthropogenic modifications impact wetlands, estuaries and near shore coastal 
ecosystems. Human ecosystem modifications addressed in terms of alterations caused by forestry, agriculture, 
highways, rural housing, suburban development, urban development and industry. Discussion of human and 
environmental health as well as ecosystem services provided by coastal systems (biogeochemical cycling and 
“blue’ carbon). Emphasis placed on gaining an understanding of human impacts on the biology of coastal waters 
through alteration of the physics, chemistry and geology of coastal waters. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. Instructor: Hunt. One course. C-L: Biology 319A, Marine Sciences
322. Hydrologic and Environmental Data Analysis. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean 
Sciences 322; also C-L: Civil and Environmental Engineering 365
332S. Environmental Justice: The Economics of Race, Place, and Pollution. EI, R, SS, W One 
course. C-L: see Economics 432S
335A. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation. NS, STS Lecture-based version of 
Environment 335LA. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Johnston. One course. C-L: Biology 
335A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
335LA. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation. NS, STS Includes a full overview 
of past and emerging applications for ecology and biology of marine species and coastal habitats, with in-
depth discussion on future of drone applications in coastal biological and ecological research. Comprehensive 
exploration of current drone technologies, including detection of target species, payloads, aeronautical concepts, 
rules and regulations, mission planning, aircraft design, maintenance, data collection, management and 
analysis. Lab components tailored to student interests: active participation in megafaunal or environmental 
research and data analysis; building, operating and maintaining aircraft, programming for manual and 
autonomous flight. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Johnston. One course. C-L: Biology 
335LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 363

336. Seabird Survival and Dispersal Analysis. NS Introduction to bird migration, navigation, seabirds as 
indicator species, natural history of sooty tern birds in the context of conservation. Introduction to field survey 
methods for seabirds, capture-recapture technique, population estimate and population evaluation, and habitat 
description for long-term monitoring, and its importance. Sampling activities include bird capture, banding, and 
morphometric measurements. Field course primarily at the Dry Tortugas National Park, FL where students can 
interact closely with park managers. Required field trip during Spring Break. Prerequisite: Environment 210D. 
Instructor: Pimm. Half course.
338S. Introduction to Environmental Life Cycle Assessment: Applications to Food Systems. NS, 
R, STS This DukeImmerse course introduces fundamental concepts and methods to conduct Environmental 
Life Cycle Assessments (LCA) to identify magnitude, type, and location of environmental impacts by food 
production from input for crops to the disposal of the final products. Discuss the Economic-Input Output 
LCA (EIO-LCA). Emphasis in understanding and estimation of the environmental impacts associated to the 
production, transportation, storage, and waste of food for human consumption, paying special attention to the 
water and energy use associated to these processes. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Patino-Echeverri. 
One course.
343S. Energy Futures and Environmental Justice. CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 345S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 334S, Human Rights
344S. Plant Diversity: A Field Approach. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 344S
346A. Marine Conservation Policy - A Practicum. EI, SS Immersion in marine conservation biology and 
policy. Experiential learning in maintenance and loss of marine biodiversity; key concepts of social science and 
law for instituting policy; position papers and stakeholder negotiation focused on ecological, economic, cultural, 
and institutional complexity associated with priorities for public trust resources. Analyze values, judgments, and 
preferences inherent in personal and public decision-making processes and competing visions for management 
and governance of marine resources. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: Public Policy 
155D suggested, or instructor consent. Concurrent enrollment required in Environment 384A/Biology 384A. 
Instructor: Nowacek. One course. C-L: Public Policy 246A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
348. Global Environmental Politics. SS This course examines the international community’s responses 
to various global environmental problems. Because many environmental problems cross national borders, 
solutions require some form of global governance such as state-led mechanisms in the form of international 
environmental regimes. The course will thus explore how and why states both succeed and fail to negotiate 
international governance mechanisms. The course will also examine why some international environmental 
regimes are more effective than others and why states choose to comply with environmental regimes. Instructor: 
Weinthal. One course. C-L: Political Science 348, Public Policy 349
350S. Marine Science and Conservation Leadership. EI, NS, SS, STS Course will explore the complex 
interactions among science, policy and economics in the use of marine resources and the role individuals play in 
promoting marine conservation and environmental sustainability. Utilizing case studies ranging from fisheries 
to offshore energy, students will evaluate trade-offs systematically and learn to assess how different policy 
options affect the incentives of resource users. Serves as the capstone for the Marine Science and Conservation 
Leadership Certificate. Prerequisite: none. Instructor: Dunn. One course. C-L: Public Policy 280S, Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
359. Fundamentals of GIS and Geospatial Analysis. NS, QS Fundamental aspects of geographic 
information systems and satellite remote sensing for environmental applications. Concepts of geographic data 
development, cartography, image processing, and spatial analysis. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: 
Harrell. One course. C-L: Earth and Ocean Sciences 359
360. Environmental Chemistry and Toxicology. NS, STS This class presents an overview of the fate and 
toxic effects of chemical pollutants in the environment. Topics include chemical characterization of pollutants, 
transfer of pollutants between and transformations within environmental compartments, toxicokinetics, 
toxic mechanisms of action, biological levels of organization, and approaches for assessing chemical hazards. 
Incorporates case studies focused on human health and ecosystem protection. Prerequisite: Biology 201L and 
Chemistry 201DL. Instructor: Ulrich, Di Giulio, Meyer. One course.
361LS. Field Ecology. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Biology 361LS



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)364

362S. Changing Oceans. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 364S; also C-L: Energy 
and the Environment, Marine Science and Conservation
362SA. Changing Oceans. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 364SA
363. Environmental Economics and Policy. QS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Economics 339; also C-L: 
Energy and the Environment, Marine Science and Conservation
365-20. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Structural Focus. QS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 315-20; also C-L: Public Policy 211-20, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 315-20
365-60. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Environmental Focus. QS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 315-60; also C-L: Public Policy 211-60, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 315-60
365D. The Modern Regulatory State. CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 365D; also C-L: Public 
Policy 219D, Political Science 340D
366. Green Germany: World Leader in Environmental Policy. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see German 364; also C-L: History 250, Energy 364
367SA. The Economics of the Energiewende in Germany. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see German 
362SA; also C-L: Economics 331SA
369LA. Biological Oceanography. NS, R One course. C-L: see Biology 369LA; also C-L: Earth and Ocean 
Sciences 273LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
370A. Physical Oceanography. NS, QS, STS Fundamental physical principles of ocean circulation. Physical 
properties of seawater; forces acting on the ocean such as heat, pressure gradients, wind stress, rotation, and 
friction; and conservation equations for heat, mass and momentum. Applications include geostrophic balances, 
thermal wind, coastally trapped waves, El Nino/ENSO, and tidal circulation. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. Prerequisite: one year of calculus and one semester of physics, or permission of instructor. Instructor: 
Hench. One course. C-L: Earth and Ocean Sciences 370A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
373LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Biology 
373LA; also C-L: Neuroscience 381LA, Marine Sciences
375A. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 375A; also C-L: 
Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
375LA. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 375LA; also C-L: 
Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
376A. Marine Mammals. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 376A; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine 
Science and Conservation
376LA. Marine Mammals. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 376LA; also C-L: Marine Sciences, 
Marine Science and Conservation
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates. NS, R One course. C-L: see Biology 377LA; also C-L: Earth 
and Ocean Sciences 377LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
380. The Calculus of Sustainability - Lessons from Complex Societies. NS, QS Sustainability 
research asks to what extent our planet, with a finite environmental resource base, can accommodate the 
faster than exponentially growing human population. The concept of carrying capacity contains many resource 
limitations originating from available water, energy, and ecosystem services. The course covers the calculus 
behind these limitations beginning from models of population growth, proceeding to the ‘Doomsday Equation’ 
and human-biosphere interactions. Dynamical systems will be used to enlighten linkages between humans and 
the Earth’s carrying capacity, renewable versus non-renewable resources, peak-oil, peak-water, and peak-grain. 
Prerequisite: (Mathematics 105L and 106L) or Mathematics 111L. Instructor: Katul. One course. 
383LA. Marine Molecular Microbiology. NS Introduction to microbiology from a marine perspective. 
Topics include microbial phylogeny, evolution, symbiosis, biotechnology, genomics, and ecology. Laboratory 
will employ modern molecular techniques to investigate the ecology and evolution of prokaryotic and eukaryotic 



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 365

microbes. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: AP Biology, introductory biology, or permission 
of instructor. Instructor: Hunt. One course. C-L: Biology 380LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and 
Conservation
384A. Marine Conservation Biology - a Practicum. NS, STS Immersion in marine conservation biology 
basics for 21st Century society and ‘anthropocene’ epoch including two week-long current issue modules. 
Phenomena affecting maintenance and loss of biodiversity (climate change, habitat destruction); strategies 
for combating threats to biodiversity; exploration of this field’s interdisciplinary nature; introduction to 
key concepts of ecology relevant to conservation issues at the level of populations and ecosystems; unique 
capstone-position papers and stakeholder negotiation. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Recommended 
prerequisite: AP Biology, Biology 202L or 203L, introductory ecology, or instructor consent. Concurrent 
enrollment required in Environment 346A/Public Policy 246A. Instructor: Nowacek. One course. C-L: Biology 
384A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
390. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Content to be determined each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-1. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Content to be determined each semester. 
Consent of instructor required. Half credit course. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Environmental Sciences 
and Policy. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Same as Environment 390, taught as 
seminar. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Content to be determined each semester. 
Half credit course. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
390SA. Special Topics in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Marine Lab version of Environment 
390S. Student must be enrolled at Duke Marine Lab in Beaufort. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual readings course or other non-research-based independent course under 
the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Open to qualified students with consent 
of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
391-1. Independent Study. See Environment 391. Open to qualified students with consent of instructor. Half 
credit. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
391A. Independent Study. Marine Lab version of Environment 391. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified students with consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
393-1. Research Independent Study. R See Environment 393. Open to qualified students with consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Marine Sciences
393A. Research Independent Study. R Marine Lab version of Environment 393. Taught in Beaufort at 
Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
394. Research Independent Study. R See Environ 393. Open to qualified students by consent of director of 
undergraduate studies and supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394A. Research Independent Study. R Marine Lab version of Environment 394. Taught in Beaufort at 
Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment. EI, NS, STS Exploration of climate change science 
focusing on marine ecosystems and inhabitants—specifically ocean acidification, warming and sea level rise. 
Factors causing climate change, and how those vary spatially, focusing on sensitive polar ecosystems and 
marine mammal populations. Critical examination of climate change modeling using EdGCM (research-grade 
Global Climate Model), focusing on how scientists use models, observations/theory to predict climate, and 



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)366

assumptions/uncertainty implicit in modeling. Discussion of potential human impacts including consequences 
of sea level rise and potential increases in disease due to climate change. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. Instructor: Johnston. One course. C-L: Biology 445A, Public Policy 445A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science 
and Conservation
452L. Energy and Environment Design. NS, R An integrative design course addressing both creative and 
practical aspects of the design of systems related to energy and the environment. Development of the creative 
design process, including problem formulation and needs analysis, feasibility, legal, economic and human 
factors, environmental impacts, energy efficiency, aesthetics, safety, and design optimization. Application of 
design methods through a collaborative design project involving students from the Pratt School of Engineering 
and Trinity College. Open only to students pursuing the undergraduate certificate in Energy and Environment. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Klein. One course. C-L: Energy 452L
461. Ocean Engineering. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 461; also C-L: 
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 426
464. Mathematics of Dynamical Systems Describing Complex Environmental Phenomena: A 
Modern Crystal Ball?. NS, QS Environmental problems require construction of and solutions to systems 
of equations for relations between rates and states of variables. Covers construction and use of differential 
equations and corollary analytical tools. Differential equations used to explain concepts as stability, resilience, 
and equilibria (e.g. climate, ecosystems, conservation efforts). Computer-aided software (MATHEMATICA and 
Matlab) used to solve analytically and numerically such equations. Case studies illustrate the mathematical 
tools derived in dynamical systems (e.g. bifurcations and catastrophe theory, boom-bust, crashes). Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 111L or equivalent and Physics 141L or equivalent. Instructor: Katul. One course.
470S. Capstone: Research in Human Rights. R, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 470S; 
also C-L: History 488S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 470S, Human Rights
476A. Data and Time Series Analysis in Marine Sciences. NS, QS This course is designed for students 
in marine and environmental science disciplines to learn data analysis skills, including analysis techniques and 
their implementation using MATLAB or R. Topics include: discrete sampling issues, data outlier and rejection 
tests, interpolation and gridding, error and propagation of uncertainty, coordinate rotations and principal axes, 
curve fits, regression, bootstrapping, filtering, spectral and harmonic analysis, spatial analyses. Other topics may 
be included or substituted depending on student interests. The course is structured as mix of weekly lectures 
and linked workshops applying methods to marine and environmental data sets. Taught in Beaufort at Duke 
Marine Lab. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Hench. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
495. Senior Capstone Course. R Interdisciplinary and in-depth study of contemporary environmental 
issues. Content to be determined each semester. Prerequisite: Environment 201. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Reid. One course.
496. Advanced Research in Environmental Sciences and Policy. R Advanced research in 
Environmental Sciences and Policy leading to Graduation with Distinction. Weekly one-hour seminars to 
guide student’s independent research towards thesis. Topics include background context through efficient 
library searches of literature, hypothesis testing, research design, data analysis, and proposal writing. Students 
write a proposal including a comprehensive literature review, methods description, and preliminary results 
demonstrating methods’ feasibility. Student peer-review used to explore various topics. Students are expected to 
work with a faculty mentor conducting original research in a research independent study. Instructor: Reid. Half 
course.
497. Communicating Research in Environmental Sciences and Policy. Weekly one-hour workshop 
intended for students writing a senior thesis in Earth and Ocean Sciences, Environmental Sciences, or 
Environmental Sciences and Policy. Topics include writings styles of environmental sciences in natural and 
social sciences, presentation of data analysis and findings, written and visual communication of research 
findings. Using peer-review of participants writing, each student will communicate their knowledge and 
perspective to other, develop a depth of knowledge in their particular area while gaining knowledge in various 
environmental topics. Assessments will be based on peer evaluation of iterations of sections of thesis drafts and 
poster drafts. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Reid. Half course.
498S. Building a Sustainable Tomorrow. SS, STS Capstone for Certificate in Sustainability Engagement 



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 367

open to senior undergraduates who have completed all other Certificate requirements. Interdisciplinary insights 
to shed light on major contemporary debates in sustainability and world’s most pressing problems. Synthesis 
and integration of ideas, concepts, and themes from their academic coursework and experiential activities with 
each dimension of sustainability, enhancing their systems analysis of chosen theme. Classes include discussion, 
readings, and guest speakers on topics in sustainability. May include fieldwork and other learning experiences 
relevant to sustainability. Held in Spring semesters. Open only to Sustainability Engagement certificate 
students. Prerequisite: Sustainability Engagement 245/Environment 245. Instructor: Clark and Philipsen. One 
course. C-L: Sustainability Engagement 498S, Public Policy 473S
501. Environmental Toxicology. NS An introduction to the field of environmental toxicology. Study of 
environmental contaminants from a broad perspective encompassing biochemical, ecological, and toxicological 
principles and methodologies. Discussion of sources, environmental transport and transformation phenomena, 
accumulation in biota and ecosystems. Impacts at various levels of organization, particularly biochemical 
and physiological effects. Prerequisites: organic chemistry and an upper-level biology course, or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Di Giulio/Meyer.
501A. Environmental Toxicology. NS An introduction to the field of environmental toxicology. Study of 
environmental contaminants from a broad perspective encompassing biochemical, ecological, and toxicological 
principles and methodologies. Discussion of sources, environmental transport and transformation phenomena, 
accumulation in biota and ecosystems. Impacts at various levels of organization, particularly biochemical and 
physiological effects. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: organic chemistry and an upper-level 
biology course, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Meyer, Di Giulio.
503. Forest Ecosystems. NS Emphasis on the processes by which forests circulate, transform, and 
accumulate energy and materials through interactions of biologic organisms and the forest environment. 
Ecosystem productivity and cycling of carbon, water, and nutrients provide the basis for lecture and laboratory. 
Instructor: Oren.
504A. Marine Protected Area Monitoring and Management. EI, NS, SS An interdisciplinary course 
that addresses concepts, issues, and approaches relevant to marine protected areas (MPAs) and their impacts 
on marine ecosystems and coastal people. Course will address key topics on MPA design, implementation, 
management, monitoring, and evaluation. Attention will be given to sensitive marine ecosystems (e.g. coral 
reefs) and resource-dependent fishing and tourism communities. Using real world case studies, students will 
apply introduced concepts and quantitative approaches to questions on MPA monitoring and evaluating their 
impacts. Students will engage with the course material primarily through group discussions, problem sets, and 
lectures. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Gill. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and 
Conservation
505. Functional Ecology of Plants. NS This course is designed for graduate and undergraduate students 
with interest in plant functional ecology. We explore how (woody) plants function and respond to changing 
climate. We focus on plant functional traits (e.g., leaf properties, wood density, maximum height) and the main 
tradeoffs controlling plant form and function in various environments. Instructor: Palmroth, Domec. C-L: 
Biology 505
512A. Deep-Sea Science and Environmental Management. NS, R, STS Explores ecosystems in the 
deep sea, including fundamental aspects of geology, chemistry, and biodiversity; behavioral, physiological, 
and biochemical adaptations of organisms (primarily invertebrate, but may include microbial and vertebrate 
components) to deep-sea benthic and bentho-pelagic environments will be introduced. Students will gain an 
understanding of the ecosystem services of the deep sea; issues in deep-sea environmental management arising 
from exploitation of deep-sea resources will be discussed. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: 
Van Dover. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
513. Groundwater and the Environment. NS, STS C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 513
517. Tropical Ecology. NS, STS Ecosystem, community, and population ecology of tropical plants and 
animals with application to conservation and sustainable development. Prerequisite: a course in general ecology. 
Instructor: Poulsen. C-L: Biology 561, Latin American Studies
520. Resource & Environmental Economics I. SS Part 1 of a survey course in environmental and 
natural resource economics. Part 1 focuses on basic theory and methods of economic analysis of environmental 



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)368

problems including benefit-cost analysis, non-market valuation, and instrument choice. Prerequisite: 
Introductory course in microeconomics and one semester of calculus. Instructor: Bennear or Smith. C-L: 
Economics 530, Public Policy 576, Energy 520, Marine Science and Conservation
520D. Resource and Environmental Economics and Policy. Discussion section for Environment 520. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Bennear or Smith. C-L: Economics 530D, Public Policy 575D
520L. Resource and Environmental Economics. The application of economic concepts to private- and 
public-sector decision making concerning natural and environmental resources. Intertemporal resource 
allocation, benefit-cost analysis, valuation of environmental goods and policy concepts. Prerequisite: 
introductory course in microeconomics. Instructor: Bennear or Smith. C-L: Economics 530L, Public Policy 575L, 
Marine Science and Conservation
521. Resource & Environmental Economics II. SS Part 2 of a survey course in environmental and natural 
resource economics. Part 2 focuses on basic theory and methods of economic analysis of natural resource 
problems including extraction of non-renewable resources over time, fisheries economics and forest economics. 
Prerequisite: Environment 520. Instructor: Bennear, Smith, or Vincent. Variable credit. C-L: Economics 531, 
Public Policy 584
524. Water Quality Health. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 524; also C-L: Global Health 534, Energy 524
528SA. Community-Based Marine Conservation in the Gulf of California. CCI, SS, STS Experiential 
education course on community-based conservation. Students learn first-hand about the challenges 
(accomplishments, failures, and promises) involved in its design and practice in developing countries of high 
biological diversity. Learn about the unique natural and political history, and social characteristics of the 
places where conservation takes place. Students link local context to broader perspectives through key readings 
and class discussions. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Travel to biodiversity hotspots in the Gulf of 
California required. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Basurto. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science 
and Conservation
530. Remote Sensing in Coastal Environments. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 
530; also C-L: Civil and Environmental Engineering 574
531L. Economic Valuation of the Environment. SS Quantitative course with focus on economic valuation 
of changes in environmental quality. Covers theoretical foundations of major nonmarket valuation methods and, 
through a series of problem sets, provides opportunities to develop skills applying those methods. Also covers 
a range of regression methods commonly employed in valuation studies. Prerequisite: Environment 520 or 
equivalent and Environment 710 or equivalent. Instructor: Vincent.
532. Evaluation of Public Expenditures. SS C-L: see Public Policy 596; also C-L: Economics 521
532D. Evaluation of Public Expenditures. SS C-L: see Public Policy 596D; also C-L: Economics 521D
533A. Marine Fisheries Policy. EI, SS Principles, structure, and process of public policy-making for marine 
fisheries. Topics include local, regional, national, and international approaches to the management of marine 
fisheries. A social systems approach is used to analyze the biological, ecological, social, and economic aspects 
of the policy and management process. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Marine 
Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
535. Air Quality Management. Types, sources, effects of air pollutants. Regulatory framework emphasizing 
the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990 and federal, state, local agency implementation. Application of risk 
assessment, technology, market incentives to air management. Scientific, policy aspects of acid deposition, 
global climate change, indoor air, mobile sources control. Dispersion modeling, exposure assessment. 
Instructor: Vandenberg, Zhang.
536. Food, Agriculture and the Environment: Law and Policy. SS This class examines agriculture 
and food production through some of the laws and policies that promote environmental protection and 
consumer welfare. Agriculture is the largest single land use in the U.S., occupying approximately 50% of the 
land mass. The industrial-agricultural model that has come to dominate food production has brought about env 
degradation in many communities. In many areas of the country, including NC, local food markets represent one 
of the most exciting opportunities for env stewardship, econ growth, and community building. However, these 
opportunities will not be realized without attention to the legal and policy structures that confront sustainable 



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 369

food production. Instructor: Nowlin.
537. Environmental Health and Epidemiology. NS, STS Introduction to environmental effects on 
human health, as well as ecological health. Focus on chronic effects of exposure to pollution on key health 
endpoints including cancer, neurological health, reproduction and development, cardiovascular and pulmonary 
health, the interaction between anthropogenic environmental changes and infectious diseases, and the 
relationship between human health and ecosystem health. Includes lectures from a variety of experts in this field 
from throughout the Triangle region. Course is designed to facilitate maximum student participation through 
discussion. For graduate and advanced undergraduate students. Instructor: Di Giulio.
538. Global Environmental Health: Economics and Policy. SS, STS C-L: see Public Policy 582; also 
C-L: Global Health 538
539. Human Health and Ecological Risk Assessment. Topics central to both health and ecological 
risk assessment are explored. Basic concepts of hazard identification, dose-response relationships, exposure 
assessment, and risk characterization and communication are discussed in the context of both human health 
and environmental assessment. The basis and rationale for using specific, as well as extrapolated, scientific 
information and expert judgment, and the strengths and weaknesses of alternative approaches, are evaluated. 
Applications emphasizing real cases are used to illustrate the interdisciplinary process and products of risk 
assessment, as well as the regulatory use of the information. Group projects emphasized. Instructors: Mihaich/
McMasters.
540. Chemical Fate of Organic Compounds. Equilibrium, kinetic, and analytical approaches applied to 
quantitative description of processes affecting the distribution and fate of anthropogenic and natural organic 
compounds in surface and ground waters, including chemical transfers between air, water, soils/sediments, 
and biota; and thermochemical and photochemical transformations. The relationships between organic 
compound structure and environmental behavior will be emphasized. Sampling, detection, identification, and 
quantification of organic compounds in the environment. Prerequisites: university-level general chemistry and 
organic chemistry within last four years. Instructor: Stapleton. C-L: Civil and Environmental Engineering 563
542L. Environmental Aquatic Chemistry. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 561L
543S. Water Cooperation and Conflict. R, SS, STS C-L: see Public Policy 580S; also C-L: Global Health 
533S, International Comparative Studies 580S
544S. Collective Action, Property Rights, and the Environment. CCI, EI, SS C-L: see Political Science 
549S; also C-L: Energy and the Environment
548. Solid Waste Engineering. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 672
549. California Water Crises: A Case Study Approach. NS, R, SS, STS Reviews history of California’s 
water dependent economy, leading to a capture, storage system with conveyances extending thousands of miles 
to deliver water for agriculture, industry and homes. Examines recent political change coupled with chronic 
issues of a water-rich north, an expanding urban population and a water-poor but politically strong south. 
Emphasis includes climate change, seismic vulnerability, redirection of river flows, and large scale water reuse. 
Course will cover specific water crises in other states and nations, providing in depth coverage of aspects of the 
international crisis in quantity and quality of freshwater. Instructor: Hinton.
550. Land Use Principles and Policy. SS The purpose of the course is to improve your understanding of 
how land is used, the key factors shaping those uses, the environmental, social and cultural impacts of different 
land uses, and how land use could be more sustainable. The course covers a wide range of land use issues and 
topics, from agriculture and forestry to zoning, property rights and natural disasters. Students will examine 
historical uses, current trends, and likely future uses of land. The main focus of the course will be on land use 
principles and practices in the United States, but we will also explore examples from other parts of the world. 
Instructor: Salvesen. C-L: Public Policy 578
551DA. International Conservation and Development. CCI, SS Interrelated issues of conservation 
and development. Topics include the evolution of the two concepts and of theories regarding the relationship 
between them, the role of science, values, ethics, politics and other issues in informing beliefs about them, and 
strategies for resolving conflicts between them. While attention will be given to all scales of interaction (i.e. local, 
regional, national, international), the focus will be on international issues and the `north-south’ dimensions 



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)370

of the conservation and development dilemma. Examples from marine and coastal environments will be 
highlighted. Consent of instructor required. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Campbell. C-L: 
Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
552. Climate and Society. EI, NS C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 550
556. Environmental Conflict Resolution. Practical techniques and scholarly underpinnings of 
environmental conflict resolution, including interest-based negotiation, mediation, public disputes, science-
intensive disputes, and negotiation analysis. In-class time will be spent conducting negotiation role plays of 
increasing complexity and then debriefing them. Outside of class, students will prepare for the role plays and 
read background material to aid in debriefing. Instructor: Addor.
557. Social Science Surveys for Environmental Management. Social science research methods for 
collecting data for environmental management and policy analysis. Sampling, survey design, focus groups, 
pretesting, survey implementation, coding, and data analysis. Team projects emphasize development and 
practice of survey skills. Prerequisite: introductory applied statistics or equivalent. Instructor: Kramer.
558L. Remote Sensing for Environmental Analysis. NS, QS, STS Environmental analysis using satellite 
remote sensing. Theoretical and technical underpinnings of remote sensing (corrections/pre-processing, image 
enhancement, analysis) with practical applications (land cover mapping, change detection e.g. deforestation 
mapping, forest health monitoring). Strong emphasis on hands-on processing and analysis. Will include variety 
of image types: multi-spectral, hyper-spectral, radar and others. Recommended prerequisite: familiarity with 
GIS. Instructor: Swenson.
559. Fundamentals of Geographic Information Systems and Geospatial Analysis. QS Fundamental 
aspects of geographic information systems and satellite remote sensing for environmental applications. Covers 
concepts of geographic data development, cartography, image processing, and spatial analysis. Gateway into 
more advanced training in geospatial analysis curriculum. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Halpin/ 
Harrell.
563. Cost-Benefit Analysis for Health and Environmental Policy. R, SS C-L: see Global Health 531; 
also C-L: Public Policy 607
564. Biogeochemistry. NS, STS C-L: see Biology 564
564D. Biogeochemistry. NS, STS C-L: see Biology 564D
565S. Stormwater Science: Pollution, Pavement, and Precipitation. NS C-L: see Biology 563S
566. Environmental Analytical Chemistry. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 565
568S. Integrated Assessment Modeling—Examining Strategies for Meeting Energy and 
Environmental Goals. NS, STS C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 568S
569. Should I Eat Fish? Economics, Ecology and Health. Examines role that individual consumer can 
play in promoting marine conservation. Course considers array of issues that confront seafood consumers 
and tradeoffs that only an informed consumer can assess. In context of evaluating seafood students will 
learn to evaluate tradeoffs systematically, assess how different policy options affect incentives for users and 
polluters. This process allows students to place consumer initiatives in context of other approaches to marine 
conservation. Interdisciplinary approach but economic themes will inform course. Course intended for 
Master of Environmental Management students, but open to advanced undergraduates with permission. This 
course is intended for MEM students and is based on a Marine Conservation Leadership Certificate capstone 
course offered previously to undergraduates. Advanced undergraduates permitted pending space availability. 
Instructor: Smith.
570. Isotopes in Earth and Environmental Sciences. NS, QS, STS C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 
571; also C-L: Civil and Environmental Engineering 551
570LA-2. Marine Ecology of the Pacific Coast of California. NS, STS C-L: see Biology 570LA-2
571A. Sojourn in Singapore: Urban Tropical Ecology. CCI, NS, SS, STS The mix of human ecology, 
tropical diversity, disturbed habitats and invasive species in Singapore. How Singapore maintains and enhances 
the quality of life of its citizens while radically modifying its environment. Research on politics, management or 
biology. Travel to Singapore required. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Consent of instructor required. 



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 371

Instructor: Rittschof and Schultz. C-L: Biology 571A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
572. Economic Evaluation of Sustainable Development. EI, SS C-L: see Public Policy 574
573. Coastal and Marine Pollution. NS, STS Sources, fate, and effects of organic, inorganic, and 
particulate pollutants in the marine environment. Topics include oil spills, coastal eutrophication, marine 
debris, harmful algae, sewage contamination, dredging, and emerging contaminants. Methods for measuring 
pollution in the marine environment and consequences for human and ecological health will be discussed. Case 
studies of impacted marine environments will be highlighted. Short local field trips possible. Recommended 
prerequisite: introductory chemistry and biology, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Ferguson.
573A. Coastal and Marine Pollution. NS, STS Sources, fate, and effects of organic, inorganic, and 
particulate pollutants in the marine environment. Topics include oil spills, coastal eutrophication, marine 
debris, harmful algae, sewage contamination, dredging, and emerging contaminants. Methods for measuring 
pollution in the marine environment and consequences for human and ecological health will be discussed. Case 
studies of impacted marine environments will be highlighted. Short local field trips possible. Taught in Beaufort 
at Duke Marine Lab. Recommended prerequisite: introductory chemistry and biology, or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Ferguson. C-L: Marine Sciences
575L. Biodiversity Science and Application. NS, R C-L: see Biology 565L
575S. Biodiversity Science and Application. NS C-L: see Biology 565S
577. Environmental Politics. SS Environmental policy formation and implementation in comparative 
perspective. Topics include interest groups, environmental movements and parties, public opinion, political 
systems and institutions. Case students selected from the United States and other advanced industrialized 
countries and the developing world. Spring. Instructor: Albright or Mullin. C-L: Public Policy 577, International 
Comparative Studies 577, Energy and the Environment
579LA. Biological Oceanography. NS, R Physical, chemical, and biological processes of the oceans, 
emphasizing special adaptations for life in the sea and factors controlling distribution and abundance of 
organisms. Four units (spring); six units (summer). Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Prerequisite: 
introductory biology. Instructor: Johnson. Variable credit. C-L: Biology 579LA, Earth and Ocean Sciences 
579LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
579S. Collective Action, Environment, and Development. SS C-L: see Public Policy 579S
581. Global Environmental Health Problems: Principles and Case Studies. NS, SS Many 
environmental problems occur both locally & globally. Having insights and experience from different parts 
of the world is important for students to gain problem-oriented training. This course will cover fundamental 
principles on physical & chemical processes related to major environmental problems. These principles will then 
be integrated to discussions of case studies addressing a specific set of problems. The case studies will involve 
the participation of invited guest instructors who are experts on specific topics/cases. Depending on preference 
of guest instructors, they can introduce a case study via online lecturing/chatting or providing a pre-made video. 
Online course. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Zhang. C-L: Global Health 581
583S. Energy and U.S. National Security. CCI, EI, SS, W C-L: see Public Policy 583S; also C-L: Political 
Science 663S, Energy and the Environment
585. Fisheries Biogeography and Ecology. NS Current status of the distribution and abundance of 
fisheries globally and current topics in fisheries ecology, explored through lecture and discussion of primary 
literature. Participation in leading discussions and mini literature review. Basic knowledge of ecology and 
oceanography. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Dunn. C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and 
Conservation
585A. Fisheries Biogeography and Ecology. NS Current status of the distribution and abundance of 
fisheries globally and current topics in fisheries ecology, explored through lecture and discussion of primary 
literature. Participation in leading discussions and mini literature review. Basic knowledge of ecology and 
oceanography. Intended for master and doctoral students. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: 
Staff.
590. Special Topics. Content to be determined each semester. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. Variable 
credit.



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)372

590LA. Duke-Administered Study Away: Special Topics. Content to be determined each semester. May 
be repeated. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
590S. Special Topics. Seminar version of 590. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
590SA. Seminar in Ocean Sciences. Biological, chemical, physical, and geological aspects of the ocean and 
their relation to environmental issues. Consent of instructor required. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. 
Instructor: Staff. Variable credit. C-L: Marine Sciences
603. Air Quality: Management. NS, QS, W Management systems are discussed, including varied 
approaches used to address criteria air pollutants, air toxics, mobile sources and acid deposition. Course 
prepares students to understand systems approach to apply science and technical information to inform policy 
decisions affecting air quality; understand and be conversant in varied approaches to manage air quality to meet 
policy objectives; be familiar with major common air pollutants and air quality management approaches applied 
to each and why approaches vary. Instructor: Vandenberg.
604. Air Quality: Human Exposure and Health Effects. NS, STS Looks at how individuals and 
populations are exposed to air pollution and what adverse health effects the exposure will cause. Covers 
exposure analysis methods, toxicological and epidemiological studies that examine health effects of air pollution 
exposure. Students will be prepared to understand concept and major methodologies of analysis for air 
pollution; how toxicology is used to determine adverse effects of air pollution exposure and underlying biological 
mechanisms; collect evidence on air pollution health effects in supporting health risk assessment. Prerequisites: 
general biology, statistics. Instructor: Zhang. C-L: Global Health 634
610. Ecotoxicology. NS Overview of ecological and toxicological effects of chemicals on structure and 
function of ecosystems, primarily at population, community and ecosystem levels of biological organization. 
Topics include environmental fate and transport of contaminants, biomonitoring, biomarkers/bioindicators, 
evolution of resistance to pollution, and extrapolating from molecular interactions to ecosystems. Incorporates 
critical discussion of in-depth case studies to highlight application of ecotoxicological concepts to real-world 
scenarios. For graduate and advanced undergraduate students. Instructor: Raftery.
615A. Aquaculture and the Environment. The major environmental, social and economic drivers of 
increasing global aquaculture, with a focus on marine systems. Quantitative evaluation and comparison of the 
range of species for aquaculture, locations where operations occur, operational aspects including environmental 
impacts and management considerations. Investigation of alternative approaches and potential future areas for 
aquaculture expansion as well as social, economic and technical barriers to implementation. Taught in Beaufort 
at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Johnson.
621. Water Resources, Finance and Planning. NS, SS Introductory course to water in the built 
environment, with basic treatment of hydrology, treatment, regulation, and planning of water resources. 
Course will serve as a survey course for non-water specialists, and a bridge course from hydrology to policy, 
management, planning, and finance, or vice versa for policy students interested in bridging to hydrology. 
Emphasis will be on applications of basic techniques common in management contexts. Instructor: Doyle.
623L. Ecological Diversity and Climate Change. NS, QS Evaluates the science of biodiversity and 
climate change, including changes happening now, in the past, and what we can expect in the future. Topics 
include forest diebacks, intensifying drought, increased wildfire, insect and pathogen outbreaks, and poleward 
migrations of land and marine populations. Analytical tools used to quantify change include elements of basic 
distribution theory, data manipulation in R, and examples of simulation methods. Each lab implements one or 
more models, including regression, GLMs, and species distribution modeling. Prerequisites: calculus, statistics. 
Instructor: Clark.
624. Agriculture and Sustainability: Feeding the Growing Human Population Today for the 
Future. NS, STS Introduces agroecology through basic scientific knowledge of plant physiology and growth for 
crop production, crop diversity and breeding, and comparison of agricultural practices (industrial, subsistence, 
organic, sustainable). Covers resources needed for whole-plant growth, biomass output for human use 
including bioenergy, and impacts on ecosystems. Examines environmental sustainability through assessment 
of drawbacks and benefits of agricultural practices for human food and biofuel production. Applications include 
management plan for sustainable agroecosystems and forecast of crop agricultural practices in need of a future 
altered environment. Prerequisites: introductory Biology or Ecology. Instructor: Reid.



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 373

626. River Processes. Course focuses on river processes and how rivers change and how to analyze rivers. 
Course is a mixture of hydrology, geomorphology, and ecology. Focus is on quantitative analysis of processes 
using simple modeling approaches. Problems will be drawn from policy and river management applications such 
as river restoration, channel design, dam management, and floodplain regulation. Instructor: Doyle.
627. Molecular Ecology. NS, STS Explore use of molecular tools to investigate ecological processes within 
natural populations and communities from terrestrial to marine. Emphasis on fundamental principles and 
predictions from ecological and evolutionary theory, as well as historical approaches and precedents. In addition 
to exploring very basic ecological questions, course discusses interpretation of molecular datasets to evaluate 
applied ecological problems with societal implications (e.g., conservation, antibiotic resistance, genetically 
modified crops, adaptation to climate change). Open to graduate students, and upper-level undergraduates with 
backgrounds in ecology and/or molecular biology. Instructor: Wernegreen. C-L: Science & Society 627, Biology 
627
630. Transportation and Energy. SS, STS Examination of transportation-related energy use and its 
impact on the environment. Learn how technology, infrastructure, and policy, as well as personal and cultural 
preferences, interact to meet demands for personal mobility and freight movement. Cutting across these themes 
will be consideration of strategies to reduce transportation energy use and its environmental impacts, with an 
introduction to information resources and tools for evaluating both. Provides opportunities to hone problem 
solving and analytical skills, and challenges students to think critically and creatively about the trade-offs among 
complex transportation options. Instructor: Johnson. C-L: Energy 630, Energy and the Environment
631. Energy Technology and Impact on the Environment. NS, STS Efficiencies and environmental 
impacts of both new and established energy sources and conversion methods. Consideration of alternative 
energy technologies, including electricity generation by fossil fuels, nuclear, solar, wind and water; space heating 
and cooling by traditional methods and by solar; and transportation energy in automobiles, mass transit and 
freight. Environmental consequences of energy choices on local, national and global scales, including toxic 
emissions, greenhouse gases and resource depletion. Prerequisite: Environment 231 or Environment 711. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Johnson. C-L: Energy 631
632. Environmental Education and Interpretation. Course will provide students with foundational 
knowledge and practical communication skills drawn from five schools of environmental education (EE): 
natural resource interpretation, science education, European approaches to EE, placed-based learning, and 
nature connectedness. Through readings, program observations, practicums, and instructor- and peer-based 
evaluations, students learn to evaluate their audience, develop measurable goals for communication, and refine 
their presentation skills. Students will also be able to adapt presentations and programs based on the five school 
of EE addressed in class. Students successfully completing course will become NAI Certified Interpretive Guides. 
Instructor: Cagle.
633. Critical Readings in Environmental Epidemiology. NS, SS, STS Basic introduction to 
epidemiological methods, skills to understand and critique, and emerging issues in environmental epidemiology 
reported in relevant journals. Students will gain knowledge of study designs and analytical methods used 
in applied epidemiology, practice designing translational and environmental epidemiological studies, and 
understand the role of epidemiology in Risk Assessment. Course will include lectures, readings, class discussion, 
oral presentation and written assignments. Instructor: Pan. C-L: Global Health 635
634. Introduction to Ecosystem Services and Methods for Quantification. NS, SS An introduction 
to ecosystem services, which is increasingly recognized as a useful concept for decision-making, and provide an 
overview of the suite of methods that are used to quantify them. The course will also provide an overview of a 
suite of skills/courses needed for ecosystem services assessment and show how they contribute to quantifying 
ecosystem services. These skills include Structured Decision Making, Ecological Modeling, Bayesian Belief 
Networks, Multi-Criteria Decision Analysis, Monetary Valuation (non-market valuation methods), & Structural 
Equation Modeling. Prerequisites: ecology, microeconomics, Environment 520/521 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Olander.
635. Energy Economics and Policy. SS Economics of markets and policies for various energy supply 
sources, energy demand and efficiency, their interactions with each other, and with the economy and 
environment. Will explore rationales for why markets for energy and related technologies have been subject 
to extensive government intervention. Course will analyze effects of policy responses, including energy price 



 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)374

regulation, the interface of energy, environmental, and technology policy, and policy motivated by energy 
security concerns. Prerequisites: Introductory Microeconomics (Economics 101 or equivalent) and college 
calculus. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Energy 635
637S. Population and Environmental Dynamics Influencing Health. NS, SS C-L: see Global Health 
637S
638. Environmental Life Cycle Analysis & Decision. NS, R, STS Provides theoretical foundations of 
environmental life cycle assessment tools and methods used for products and global supply chains. Introduces 
various life cycle inventory and life cycle assessment tools used by the community of scientists and industry. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Golden. C-L: Energy 638
640. Climate Change Economics and Policy. This course explores the economic characteristics of the 
climate change problem, assesses national and international policy design and implementation issues, and 
surveys the economic tools necessary to evaluate climate change policies. Discussion-oriented requiring 
high degree of student participation. Course objectives are increased comprehension of economic aspects of 
climate change and ability to apply tools of economic analysis to climate policy and the responses of firms and 
households to it. Course designed for graduate and advanced undergraduate students. Instructor: Pizer. C-L: 
Public Policy 585
642. Air Pollution: From Sources to Health Effects. Both urban outdoor air pollution and household 
indoor air pollution contribute significantly to global burden of disease. Course covers fundamentals about how 
major air pollutants are generated and transported in the atmosphere and how these pollutants affect human 
health. Relevant exposure assessment, toxicology and epidemiology case studies are discussed. Prerequisites: 
general chemistry; introductory-level statistics. Instructor: Zhang. C-L: Global Health 630
646. Urban Ecology. NS, R, SS, W Addresses how to understand urban areas as ecological and socio-
ecological systems and the distinction between the study of ecology in and of cities. Examines both through 
theoretical lens of socio-ecological systems, in which humans and their actions are a component of, rather than 
disturbance imposed on, ecological systems. Applies theoretical and methodological tools to global, regional, 
and local urban issues. Prerequisites: One ecology course and one environmental social sciences course. 
Instructor: Heffernan.
650S. Advanced Topics in the Conservation of Biodiversity. NS Current topics in conservation and 
biodiversity. Intended for graduate students; advanced undergraduate students admitted with permission of 
instructor. Prerequisite: introductory conservation biology or permission of instructor. Instructor: Pimm.
658. Applied Qualitative Research Methods. R Broadly covers qualitative and mixed methods research 
design, analysis, and interpretation. Students gather a limited amount of their own data and produce a pilot 
research project throughout the semester. Students learn to use NVivo10, a qualitative research software 
program. Instructor: C. Clark.
665. Bayesian Inference for Environmental Models. NS C-L: see Biology 665; also C-L: Information 
Science + Studies
666. Aquatic Geochemistry. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 666
667. Chemical Transformation of Environmental Contaminants. C-L: see Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 667
678. Population Ecology for a Changing Planet. NS, STS Overview of the expanding field of population 
ecology, including the use of new bioinformatic tools to study topics such as the impacts of climate change on 
population dynamics, population growth and regulation, adaptive evolution, and emerging diseases. Lecture 
and discussion of case studies will evaluate current knowledge and productive research directions, highlighting 
analysis of observational and experimental data sets. Prerequisites: introductory statistics and calculus. 
Instructor: J. Clark. C-L: Biology 678
680. Economics of Forest Resources. SS Core economic theory of forest management and application 
of theory to selected forestry policy issues. Course focuses on management of forests for timber production as 
well as for non-timber values. Concepts explored include policy challenges such as biodiversity conservation, 
deforestation, community forest management, and payments for ecosystem services. Two groups of economic 
tools will be used: non-market valuation methods and program evaluation techniques. Prerequisites: college-



Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 375

level calculus, microeconomics and statistics, as well as Excel proficiency. Instructor: Vincent.
684. Politics of the Urbanized Environment. Examines the politics of environmental management 
in urbanized areas. Students will gain understanding of political, economic and social constraints on local 
government decision-making; pathways by which local policy decisions shape environmental outcomes; tools 
to improve environmental outcomes and conditions for using the tools. Students will gain competencies in 
identifying opportunities for improved environmental outcomes, evaluating feasibility of environmental 
management strategies, and developing and communicating them appropriately. Course material will emphasize 
US cities with some attention to non-US urbanized environments. Course assumes familiarity with US 
government. Instructor: Mullin.

The Major
The bachelor of arts degree in environmental sciences and policy and the bachelor of science degree in 

environmental sciences are offered within the Nicholas School of the Environment. For a complete list of elective 
courses, visit https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/undergraduate-programs.

For the AB Degree
Corequisites. The following courses or their equivalents (for example, Advanced Placement credit) 

are required. Approval to substitute courses taken at other universities must be obtained from the director of 
undergraduate studies in the department offering the course. Some of these courses are prerequisites to some 
upper-level courses in this major.

• Environment 102 (Introduction to Environmental Sciences and Policy)
• Biology 201L or 202L or 203L (Gateway to Biology)
• Chemistry 101L or 110L (Advanced General Chemistry), or equivalent
• Economics: Economics 101 (Economic Principles); Environment 155 (Principles of Economics and the 

Environment); or Political Science 145 (Introduction to Political Economy) or equivalent 
• Mathematics 111L (Introductory Calculus) or equivalent (e.g., Mathematics 105L and 106L)
• Statistics: Statistical Science 101L, 102L, 111L, 130L, or 199L; or Biology 304; or Sociology 333; or 

equivalent 

Major Requirements
• Gateway Course: Environment 201 (Integrating Environmental Sciences and Policy)
• Topical Areas: One course in each area, chosen from a list of approved courses:

• Environmental Humanities
• Environmental Sciences
• Environmental Policy

• Focus Area: Students are required to choose a focus area and take three courses around that focus, 
at least one of which is a 500-level course. Focus areas will be chosen under the direction of the 
student’s major advisor and will be approved by the director of undergraduate studies upon successful 
submission of a short essay outlining the focus area and justifying the chosen courses.

• Capstone: Environment 495 (Capstone Course). Participating in Graduation with Distinction (GWD) 
can fulfill this requirement.

• Field Experience or Internship: Students will complete a field experience or internship relevant to 
their major. The Duke Career Center maintains information on available internships. Field experiences 
may include a semester or summer session at the Duke University Marine Laboratory or participation 
in field-oriented study abroad programs.

For the BS Degree
Corequisites: The following courses or their equivalents (for example, Advanced Placement credit) 

are required. Approval to substitute course taken at other universities must be obtained from the director of 
undergraduate studies in the department offering the course. Some of these courses are prerequisites to upper-
level courses in this major.

• Environment 102 (Introduction to Environmental Sciences and Policy)
• Biology 201L or 202L or 203L (Gateway to Biology) or equivalent
• Chemistry 101DL (Advanced General Chemistry) and either Chemistry 210DL or 201DL or equivalents. 

https://nicholas.duke.edu/academics/undergraduate-programs


 Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON)376

• Physics 141L, 151L, 161D, or 164L (Introductory Physics); or equivalent
• Mathematics 111L and 112L (Introductory Calculus), or equivalent
• Statistical Science 101L, 102L, 111L, 130L, or 199L; or Biology 304

Major Requirements
• Gateway Course: Environment 201 (Integrating Environmental Sciences and Policy)
• Core Areas: One course in each area, chosen from a list of approved courses: 

• Environmental Health 
• Ecology
• Environmental Physical Sciences
• Environmental Social Sciences
• Environmental Tools/Skills 

• Focus Area: Students are required to choose a focus area and take three courses around that focus, at 
least one of which is a 500-level course. One of these courses can overlap the core courses. Focus areas 
will be chosen under the direction of the student’s major advisor and will be approved by the director 
of undergraduate studies upon successful submission of a short essay outlining the focus area and 
justifying the chosen courses.

• Capstone: Environment 495 (Capstone Course). Participating in Graduation with Distinction (GWD) 
can fulfill this requirement.

• Field Experience or Internship: Students will complete a field experience or internship relevant to 
their major. The Duke Career Center maintains information on available internships. Field experiences 
may include a semester or summer session at the Duke University Marine Laboratory or participation 
in field-oriented study abroad programs.

For the AB Degree with Concentration in Marine Science and Conservation (MSC)
The Environmental Sciences and Policy Program also offers an AB degree with concentration in marine 

science and conservation. The corequisite, gateway, and capstone requirements are the same as the AB degree 
in environmental science and policy. Students must choose at least one course in each of three topical areas 
(Environmental Humanities, Marine Conservation, and Marine Science) and must choose three courses in an 
area of specialization (Marine Science or Marine Conservation), including at least one independent study. Lists 
of courses satisfying the topical areas are maintained on the Duke Marine Lab website (https://nicholas.duke.
edu/marinelab/). Courses satisfying the area of specialization will be chosen in consultation with a major advisor 
and/or the marine lab director of undergraduate studies. Students seeking an AB degree with a concentration in 
marine science and conservation are required to spend at least one semester at Duke Marine Lab. 

For the BS Degree with Concentration in Marine Science and Conservation (MSC)
The Environmental Sciences and Policy Program also offers a BS degree with concentration in marine 

science and conservation. The corequisite, gateway, and capstone requirements are the same as the BS degree in 
environmental science and policy. Students must choose at least five courses in each of five core areas (Marine 
Ecology, Conservation, Organismal: Structure/Function, Marine Processes, and Marine Tools/Skills). In addition, 
students must specialize in an area by completing three courses in that area, including at least one independent 
study. Lists of courses satisfying the topical areas are maintained on the Duke Marine Lab website (https://
nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/). Courses satisfying the area of specialization will be chosen in consultation with 
a major advisor and/or the marine lab director of undergraduate studies. Students seeking a BS degree with a 
concentration in marine science and conservation are required to spend at least one semester at Duke Marine Lab.

The Minor

Environmental Sciences and Policy
Requirements: Five courses: two core courses (Environment 102 and Environment 201); the remaining 

three courses selected from 200-level or above environment courses, which may include one substitution of a 
course in another department. Students with AP credit must select an additional environment course in place of 
Environment 102 to equal five courses.

https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/


Environmental Sciences and Policy Program (ENVIRON) 377

Advising in Environmental Sciences and Policy 
Advisors are assigned based on students’ general areas of interest. Students present a proposed plan of 

study to their advisors that explains the rationale for their chosen area of concentration within their focused study. 
The program encourages close relationships between faculty and students with convergent interests.

Graduation with Distinction
The environmental sciences and policy and environmental sciences both offer a Graduation with 

Distinction option. Interested students with a 3.0 grade point average overall and 3.2 grade point average in the 
environmental sciences/policy major should apply by the beginning of their senior year. The application should 
include a written request to the director of undergraduate studies describing the proposed research project, and 
identifying a primary faculty advisor who has agreed to supervise the research. Students are required to take one 
independent research study as part of the Graduation with Distinction process. Students will write a substantial 
paper describing their completed research, which is evaluated by the faculty advisor, and will make an oral 
presentation to students and faculty of the program before the end of classes of the student’s final semester. For 
additional information and an application form, contact the director of undergraduate programs or visit https://
sites.nicholas.duke.edu/undergrad/graduation-with-distinction.

Ethics
Suzanne Shanahan, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Geoffrey Harpham, Director of the Ethics & Society 
Certificate 

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The goal of the undergraduate Ethics & Society Certificate is to provide students with an opportunity to 

pursue a rigorous cross-disciplinary study of ethics. Such a course of study requires familiarity with systematic 
ethical theories and traditions of moral wisdom and reflection, an understanding of how ethical issues have 
been framed across history and cultures, experience delving into ethical issues through literature and the arts, 
and insights into how ethical challenges are being conceptualized and negotiated in practice by policymakers, 
researchers, doctors, journalists, and others. Ethics cannot be isolated within one or two disciplines. It is an 
inherently cross-disciplinary inquiry that needs to draw on tools, methods, and contexts from multiple disciplines. 

Students pursuing the Ethics & Society Certificate have the opportunity to pursue two different pathways. 
The first is a course based pathway consisting of six courses (including the Gateway and Capstone courses, which 
every certificate student has to take). The experiential pathway combines four courses with two experiential 
components: a faculty mentored independent research project and community-based field work. 

In the standard course-based version, six courses are required for completion of the certificate program:
• Ethics 101D/Ethics 101 (Gateway - The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life)
• Ethics 497S (Capstone Seminar)
• Four additional courses from a list of approved ethics courses, which include courses in Philosophical 

Ethics, Cross-Cultural Ethical Traditions, Ethics in Historical Perspective, Ethics in Literature and 
the Arts, and Ethics of Contemporary Issues. Students must take one Philosophical Ethics course and 
one Cross-Cultural Ethical Traditions course. They must take one course in either Ethics in Historical 
Perspective or Ethics in Literature and the Arts. The final elective course may come from any of the five 
elective categories.

In the experiential version of the certificate, students take four courses and complete two experiences:
• Ethics 101D/Ethics 101 (Gateway - The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life) (introductory course). 

Students may complete no more than one experience before taking the gateway course. 
• Ethics 497S (Capstone Seminar). The capstone cannot be taken until all other requirements are 

complete. 
• Two ethics courses of the students’ choosing from an approved list of courses.
• Two not-for-credit experiences are also required. The first must be a faculty-mentored research 

experience and the second must be a community-based field experience. One experience must be at 
least 150 hours in duration and the other must be at least 300 hours in duration. 

The experiential track requires study formulated around one of six areas: human rights, global migration, 
rethinking regulation, ethics and environmental policy, moral attitudes and decision making, or religion and 

https://sites.nicholas.duke.edu/undergrad/graduation-with-distinction
https://sites.nicholas.duke.edu/undergrad/graduation-with-distinction


 Ethics (ETHICS)378

public life. Students must receive pre-approval of two thematically related experiences. For details, please contact 
the director of the Ethics & Society Certificate.

Following is a list of courses which have historically been approved for the certificate in the study of ethics. 
Please see the ethics certificate program website for a complete current course listing as well as approved courses 
from past semesters: https://kenan.ethics.duke.edu/programs/ethics-society-certificate.

Courses in Ethics (ETHICS)
89S. Special Topic: First-Year Seminar in Ethics. First-year seminar course. Topics vary each semester 
offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life. CZ, EI Familiar but fundamental ethical questions: What is 
a good, worthy or just life? How is it to be lived, toward what ends? Readings include dramas and philosophical 
analyses, parables and auto- biographies, polemics and meditations, novels and political commentaries. 
Introductory course for the Ethics & Society Certificate. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 120
101D. The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life. CZ, EI Familiar but fundamental ethical questions: 
What is a good, worthy or just life? How is it to be lived, toward what ends? Readings include dramas 
and philosophical analyses, parables and autobiographies, polemics and meditations, novels and political 
commentaries. Introductory course for the Certificate Program in the Study of Ethics. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Political Science 120D, Philosophy 219D
111S. The Examined Life. EI Provides opportunity to ponder, critique, and reflectively engage diverse 
perspectives on persistent questions related to the concept of a life well-lived. Includes such topics as purpose, 
vision, direction, passion, creativity, courage, determination, accomplishment, success, failure, death, virtue, 
character, habit, friendship, and community. Readings, exercises, and discussions encourage students to 
examine how these topics intersect with their own lives and those of others. Priority given to first-year students. 
Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: Hartemink. One course.
123. Private Wealth and Public Giving: A Modern History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 123; also C-L: Public Policy 177, International Comparative Studies 123
129FS. Human Rights and World Politics. EI, SS Examines the role of human rights and global justice 
in world politics. We will consider questions such as whether human rights are universal, what role human 
rights and global justice should be play in U.S. foreign policy, which strategies are most effective in promoting 
human rights and global justice, and which risk inciting backlash. The course will cover topics including civil 
and political rights; economic, social and cultural rights; genocide, torture, humanitarian intervention, and the 
international criminal court. Instructor: Duara. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 128FS, 
Political Science 176FS, Public Policy 181FS, Human Rights
140FS. On Suffering: How Science and Stories Shape Us. ALP, EI By studying written and oral 
storytelling (including news articles, research reports, case histories, speeches, etc.), this course explores 
arguments for, and critiques of, appealing to stories in the face of suffering—personal and environmental—
and starts articulating theological and ethical implications of ‘being an engaged witness in the world.’ We will 
listen to historical and contemporary voices that have shaped our views of the world, explore characteristics 
of pseudoscientific movements that make us squirm, and dig into the apparent and real differences between 
scientific, experiential, and theological reasoning. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department 
consent required. Instructor: Barfield. One course. C-L: Global Health 140FS, Science & Society 140FS, 
Sociology 140FS
150FS. Citizenship, Patriotism, & Identity. CZ, EI, SS This course introduces students to fundamental 
moral questions about nation states and individuals’ membership in them. Do people owe more to their 
compatriots than to foreigners? Is it desirable—or at least permissible—for countries to have and promote 
a national identity? What different forms can patriotism take, and in which (if any) of these forms is it a 
virtue? Should we all be “citizens of the world?” These questions will be explored primarily through readings 
in contemporary moral and political philosophy. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: 
MacMullen. One course. C-L: Public Policy 167FS, Political Science 150FS
160FS. Globalization and Corporate Citizenship. EI, SS Are corporations citizens? And if so who defines 
their rights and responsibilities? To whom are they obligated? This course will critically examine the origins 
and diffusion of increasingly prevalent notions of corporate citizenship and corporate social responsibility from 

https://kenan.ethics.duke.edu/programs/ethics-society-certificate


Ethics (ETHICS) 379

an anthropological perspective. Particular emphasis will be upon corporate environmental and conservation 
policies in East Africa and the United States. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Director of 
undergraduate studies consent required. Instructor: Philipsen. One course. C-L: History 127FS, Public Policy 
187FS, Economics 112FS
170FS. Liberty and Equality: Ancient and Modern Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 170FS; also C-L: Political Science 170FS
171FS. The Ethics of Democracy. ALP, CZ, EI Exploration of the ways in which, in an American context, 
social, political, or historical issues can become focused in moments of individual ethical decision, or indecision. 
In-depth probing through literary analysis and other methods of the ways in which novels and films approach 
characteristically American tensions surrounding issues of race, sex, inequality, religion, education, and 
patriotism. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Harpham. One 
course. C-L: English 173FS
171S. The Ethics of Democracy. CZ, EI Exploration of the ways in which, in an American context, social, 
political, or historical issues can become focused in moments of individual ethical decision, or indecision. In-
depth probing of the ways in which novels and films approach characteristically American tensions surrounding 
issues of race, sex, inequality, religion, education, and patriotism. Instructor: Harpham. One course. C-L: 
English 173S
187FS. American Democracy: Two Centuries of Creating Institutions to Achieve its Principles. 
CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 187FS
188FS. American Perspectives on Citizenship. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 188FS
189. What Now? The Duke Guide to Happiness, Purpose, and Well-Being. Integration and practice 
course to accompany What Now? full-credit seminars. Provides a space for synthesis of seminar-specific 
learning with program-wide facilitated conversations, community building, and activities. Course content 
will include regular weekly reflections and an integrative semester capstone project identifying key insights 
on individual students’ semester experiences and deliberative next steps through Duke. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Ferney. Half course.
190FS. Special Topics in Ethics (Focus Program). Topics vary. Open only to students in the Focus 
program. Topics course. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
194FS. Beyond Disagreement and Cozy Consensus. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 194FS
195S. Human Rights and Legal Redress: Seeking Justice through Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS In this course, students will analyze through case studies the issues that confront the implementation of 
human rights ethics down through the layers separated by geography and culture to local implementation 
and enforcement. They will acquire an understanding of the international, regional and local human rights 
conventions and structures which propose, cultivate and enforce the ethical norms of the international human 
rights regime. This class addresses questions including: in what respects do enforcement options differ from 
place to place? When, where and under what circumstances is the human rights apparatus most effective in 
providing redress for rights violations? And, what are the alternatives to the human rights approach to justice? 
Instructor: Duara. One course. C-L: Public Policy 209S
199FS. Refugees, Rights, and Resettlement. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 178FS; also C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 178FS, Human Rights
204. Feminist Ethics. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 367
204S. Feminist Ethics. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 367S
205S. Composing Oneself: Stress, Identity, and Wellness. ALP, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Writing 205S; also C-L: Arts & Sciences IDEAS themes and University Course 205S
211S. Theories and Strategies of Social Change: Connections to the Pathways of Change Summer 
Program. EI, SS This course focuses on theories of change and is a forum for Pathways students to integrate 
their summer experiences. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Duara, Jowers, Katzenstein. Half course.
215. Resettling Refugees in Durham. This service-learning course partners students with locally resettled 



 Ethics (ETHICS)380

refugee families to identify social problems in the community and work toward solutions for addressing them. 
Students will work one-on-one with refugees to complete coursework and/or projects for the service-learning 
component of this course. By working with refugees, Duke students develop a better awareness of global issues 
present at a local level. End products of this course vary by semester. Students have worked to help produce 
films, gallery exhibits, and other public pieces relaying the refugee experience. This course is part of the 
MASTERY/SuWA refugee mentorship program. Instructor: Shanahan. Half course.
216. Reimagine Medicine. The course extends the experiences, learning, and community established in 
the ReMed summer fellowship. Physicians and other healthcare practitioners, as well as faculty in the arts and 
humanities, will challenge students to examine historical, social, economic, and cultural determinants of health, 
and to imagine themselves contributing to improving the system for patients and practitioners. Students will 
support each other as they develop a personal statement and sample essays for medical school applications. Key 
learning will be expressed through original works of visual and performing art. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Ferney. Half course.
216S. Reimagine Medicine. The course extends the experiences, learning, and community established in 
the ReMed summer fellowship. Physicians and other healthcare practitioners, as well as faculty in the arts and 
humanities, will challenge students to examine historical, social, economic, and cultural determinants of health, 
and to imagine themselves contributing to improving the system for patients and practitioners. Students will 
support each other as they develop a personal statement and sample essays for medical school applications. Key 
learning will be expressed through original works of visual and performing art. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Ferney. Half course.
220. Christian Ethics and Modern Society. CZ, EI, W An introduction to Christian ideals of conduct, 
character, and community, and to modern disputes over their interpretation and application. Are Christian 
virtues and principles fundamentally at odds with the ethos of liberal democracy oriented toward rights, 
equality, and freedom? What do Christian beliefs and moral concepts imply about issues related to identity 
and pluralism? What is the relationship between religious convictions, morality, and law? Special emphasis 
on selected political and economic problems, sexuality and marriage, capital punishment, animals and the 
environment, abortion, and the role of religion in public life. Instructor: Rose. One course. C-L: Political Science 
253, Religion 254
220S. Christian Ethics and Modern Society. CZ, EI, W An introduction to Christian ideals of conduct, 
character, and community, and to modern disputes over their interpretation and application. Are Christian 
virtues and principles fundamentally at odds with the ethos of liberal democracy oriented toward rights, 
equality, and freedom? What do Christian beliefs and moral concepts imply about issues related to identity 
and pluralism? What is the relationship between religious convictions, morality, and law? Special emphasis 
on selected political and economic problems, sexuality and marriage, capital punishment, animals and the 
environment, abortion, and the role of religion in public life. Instructor: Rose. One course. C-L: Political Science 
253S, Religion 354S
221. Arab Society and Culture in Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 221; also C-L: Islamic Studies
235S. Muslim Philosophy and Theology, an introduction. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 374S; 
also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 324S, Islamic Studies
238S. Activism & Christianity in Modern America. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Religion 238S; 
also C-L: Political Science 244S, African & African American Studies 238S
240. Love and Loneliness: What’s Happening to Relationships in the Twenty-First Century?. 
CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 240; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 
250, Sociology 240
250S. Governance and Healthcare Innovation. EI, SS, STS Examination of the role of regulation, 
business, and globalization in healthcare innovation. Class consists of three integrated parts. Part one covers 
basics of healthcare innovation: how medicines and vaccines “come to be” and key ethical concerns that arise 
in bringing them to the market. Part two traces how the current US regulatory system governing healthcare 
innovation developed. Part three maps ecology of private and quasi-public governance tools available to regulate 
potentially harmful behaviors in healthcare innovation. Concepts of regulatory capture, deliberative democracy, 



Ethics (ETHICS) 381

and technocracy also be introduced. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: Global Health 310S
253S. Pursuit of Purpose: Exploring What to Be and Why. EI, SS Preparation course for students 
who plan to undertake a summer internship through the Kenan Purpose Program. Engages students in their 
own pursuit of a purpose-oriented life. Exploration of meaning, purpose, and vocation in historical and 
contemporary contexts. Introduces durable philosophical questions and key social, cultural, and historical 
forces that shape current definitions of a good life. Guided reflection on integrating big questions, contemporary 
context, and practical vocational discernment skills. Readings to be selected from literary, philosophical, 
sociological, and theological writings and present-day case studies. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: 
Ferney. One course.
255. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-
2015. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 255; also C-L: History 252, Public Policy 254, Markets and 
Management Studies
258. Moral Dilemmas in Philosophy and Literature. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 250; 
also C-L: Literature 250
259. News as a Moral Battleground. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 371; also C-L: Public Policy 371, Documentary Studies 371, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 371, Documentary Studies, Human Rights
260S. Happiness and the Virtuous Life. CZ, EI, W Using texts from the virtue ethics tradition, seminar 
will take up questions regarding definitions of “happiness” and “virtue,” relation between happiness and practice 
of virtue, how both connect to human nature and friendships, and modern critiques of virtue-based ethics. 
Readings from Aristotle, Elizabeth Anscombe, Alasdair MacIntyre, Martha Nussbaum. Instructor: Rose. One 
course.
262S. Global Migration and Ethics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 216S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 244S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 216S, Human 
Rights
264S. Religion & Journalism. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Religion 264S; also C-L: Policy Journalism and 
Media Studies 264S
265. Applied and Environmental Ethics. CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 215; also C-L: 
Marine Science and Conservation
267S. Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 267S; also C-L: Russian 267S, Public 
Policy 267S, Sociology 267S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 267S, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
269. Neuroethics. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 267; also C-L: Psychology 278, 
Philosophy 353
270. Business Ethics: The Debate Over Corporate Social Responsibility. EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Philosophy 270; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 271, Markets and Management Studies
271. Life Within Capitalism: A History of its Values, Measures and Struggles. CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 249; also C-L: Economics 270, History 284, Political Science 252
274S. Aristotle and Neuroscience. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 374S; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 274S
275. Democracy: Ancient and Modern. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 275; also 
C-L: Political Science 211, History 234
276. Roman Political Thought and Its Modern Legacy. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 278; also C-L: History 262, Political Science 278
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 277S; also C-L: Global Health 277S, Public Policy 274S, Russian 277S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 277S, Human Rights
280. Taboo Markets. EI, SS Exploration of the social organization of taboo, stigmatized, or otherwise 
morally controversial markets. Examples include markets for alcohol and other drugs, sex work, gambling, 



 Ethics (ETHICS)382

adoption, domestic labor, blood, organs, eggs, sperm, genetic material, viaticals, and pollution rights. 
Examination of both empirical and normative studies of such exchanges, together with debates surrounding the 
creation, expansion, and regulation of these markets. Includes consideration of broader arguments about the 
scope and limits (if any) of the market as a social institution, and its relationship to other modes of exchange. 
Instructor: Healy. One course. C-L: Sociology 340, International Comparative Studies 280
285. Denial, Faith, Reason: Sustainability and Survival. EI One course. C-L: see Public Policy 284; also 
C-L: Economics 285, Environment 276, History 325, Sustainability Engagement 276
287. Religion and Science. CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Religion 287; also C-L: Neuroscience 237, 
Marine Science and Conservation
287S. Religion and Science. CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Religion 287S; also C-L: Neuroscience 237S
288S. Ethical Dimensions of Environmental Policy. CZ, EI, SS Uses case studies from different 
arenas of environmental policy (e.g., climate and clean air, water and waste, forests, oceans, energy) to surface 
normative assumptions often implicit in policy design and implementation. Links ethics to ethos (beliefs, 
aspirations, and spirit of a community or culture) to suggest that policies are not only pragmatic guidelines for 
decision-making and action, but also fundamental declarations concerning the character of human flourishing 
and the shape of the natural world, which is why environmental policies are often so contentious. Seeks to help 
students understand this aspect of environmental policy and to negotiate these deep-seated ethical conflicts. 
Instructor: Toole and Jowers. One course. C-L: Global Health 248S
290. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary by semester. Seminar version of Ethics 290. Instructor: staff. 
One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Instructor: Shanahan. One course.
301S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab. EI, R, W An exploration of human rights advocacy 
from an ethical, political science and comparative perspective. Will focus on issues related to business and 
human rights. A core component of the course will include a human rights “lab” in which students work in 
groups on policy-oriented projects in collaboration with international NGOs. Permission of instructor required. 
Instructor: Katzenstein. One course. C-L: Political Science 341S, International Comparative Studies 317S, Public 
Policy 311S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 301S, Markets and Management Studies, 
Human Rights
303D. Religion, Restrictions, and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 301D; also C-L: 
Jewish Studies 301D, Political Science 303D, Public Policy 313D, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 301D
315S. Ethics and Philosophy of Sport. CZ, EI, W An examination of ethical issues and dilemmas of sport 
in the modern world. Topics to be discussed include amateurism, the NCAA and college athletics, performance 
enhancement, money in college and professional sport, gambling, the athlete as a role model, and the coach 
as sage. Inevitably, consideration of these issues will lead to a discussion of wider issues, such as the value of 
sport and the role of sport in the “good life”. Students will write two short papers examining particular ethical 
dilemmas, and will write a longer term-ending paper which evaluates in depth one of the issues raised in the 
course of the semester. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kennedy. One course.
316S. Self-Knowledge and the Pursuit of Wisdom. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 316S
319. Ethics and Native American: American Indian Life and Literature. CCI, CZ, EI Pine Ridge 
Indian Reservation sits in the poorest county in the U.S. Unemployment runs over 80%. Health outcomes are 
dismal. In the Western Hemisphere, only Haiti has a lower life expectancy. Pine Ridge was also the site of the 
1890 Wounded Knee Massacre, the effective end of the protracted struggle of the Indians of the Great Plains to 
preserve their cultures in the face of “manifest destiny.” Pine Ridge is extreme, but its story is common. Drawing 



Ethics (ETHICS) 383

principally on American Indian literature from the West—and on historical works and primary sources—this 
course explores the contemporary realities of Native American life and traces these realities back into the 
nineteenth century. Instructor: Toole. One course. C-L: Literature 319, History 317
320S. Narrative and Moral Crisis. ALP, CZ, EI It is often said that literature encourages ethical reflection, 
and even that it somehow fortifies our disposition to behave in ethical ways. This class will consider a different 
possibility, that literature, or narrative more generally, often represents or provokes circumstances of extreme 
moral uncertainty. Such uncertainty, sometimes focused in a moment of decision and sometimes arising from 
a clash of perspectives, can gather around characters, narrators, authors, and even readers. We will be focusing 
on a few works of literary and cinematic art, ranging from the Book of Genesis to Ian McEwan’s Atonement, 
in which moral issues emerge with particular urgency and complexity. Instructor: Harpham. One course. C-L: 
English 319S
321S. Buddhist Ethics. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Religion 321S; also C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 331S, Marine Science and Conservation
344. Global Health as an Ethical Enterprise. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 345
345S. Muslim Ethics and Islamic Law: Issues and Debates. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 
388S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 206S
351S. Adoption Ethics. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 351S
373S. Islamic Mysticism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 373S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 380S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 373S, History 380S, Islamic Studies
374S. Watchdog Reporting in Politics. EI, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
374S; also C-L: Public Policy 357S, Political Science 374S
375. Reproductive Ethics. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 375
388S. Refugee Policy and Practice (DukeImmerse). CCI, EI, QS, SS Uses current debates around 
refugee law and policy as the context in which to develop basic quantitative research design and analysis skills. 
Course may include data collection with resettled refugee locally and in Jordan and in Nepal. Only open to 
DukeImmerse students. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Shanahan. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 355S, Political Science 357S, Public Policy 382S
389S. Field Ethics (DukeImmerse). ALP, EI, R, SS, W An introduction to qualitative research design and 
analysis including interviewing, ethnography, focus groups as well as a a variety of visual methods, including 
mapping and photo elicitation. Emphasis on the ethics of research design, implementation, and presentation 
and ethics of research with vulnerable populations. Students will collect refugee life stories as the basis of a 
documentary theater production they will write and perform as their final project. Course may include field 
research in Jordan and Nepal. Open only to DukeImmerse students. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Shanahan. One course. C-L: Sociology 389S
390. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Ethics. Topics differ by section. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic 
Engagement. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Education 401S; also C-L: Political Science 401S, Public Policy 401S
487S. Designing Ethics: Exploring the Integration of Ethics into Engineering Curricula. EI, 
STS Many engineering challenges contain thorny moral questions, yet ethical considerations are often 
secondary to the technical aspects of engineering curricula. In fact, nationwide ethics is rarely addressed in 
standard engineering disciplinary courses at Duke or elsewhere. This course seeks provide a blueprint and 
testing ground for addressing this gap. Students will work to research best practices from the educational and 
private sectors. Incorporating those insights with a study of the landscape of Engineering design education at 
Duke, students will design interventions that may be deployed in Duke Engineering classes. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Ferney, Saterbak, Shanahan. One course.
488. Designing Interventions for the Prevention of Sexual Assault and Harassment. EI This 



 Ethics (ETHICS)384

course’s goals are to summarize the problems and practices in sexual harassment intervention and training by 
conducting a review of the literature; examine the potential role of courage and self-awareness, as well as the 
ways these characteristics could be developed in individuals and incorporated into interventions; and to develop 
designs that utilize these insights. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Anisman-Razin. One course.
489. Preventing Sexual Misconduct on University Campuses. This Bass Connections project’s goals 
are to summarize the problems and practices in sexual harassment intervention and training by conducting 
a review of the literature; examine the potential role of courage and self-awareness, as well as the ways these 
characteristics could be developed in individuals and incorporated into interventions; and to develop designs 
that utilize these insights. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Anisman-Razin, Shanahan, Sitkin. One 
course.
490S. Capstone Research Seminar in Ethics. This intensive senior seminar is the capstone for the 
Ethics Certificate Program. Here they return to the central theme of the Gateway course, Challenges of Living 
an Ethical Life, through research. Students bring together interdisciplinary insights from previous work in the 
certificate program to shed light on major contemporary debates in the study of ethics and the world’s most 
pressing social problems. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
497S. Capstone Seminar: Ethics & Society Certificate. EI, R, W This intensive senior seminar is the 
capstone for the Ethics & Society Certificate. The students choose a topic, read about and discuss that topic, and 
then write a book together on that topic, editing each other’s chapters. Students bring together interdisciplinary 
insights from previous work in the certificate program and work collaboratively to produce their book. 
Instructor consent required. This course is only open to seniors pursuing the Ethics & Society Certificate. 
Instructor: Sinnott-Armstrong. One course.
510S. Adversarial Ethics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 510S; also C-L: Political Science 585S
555S. The Politics of Market Competition in a Global Economy. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political 
Science 555S; also C-L: Public Policy 555S, Markets and Management Studies
560S. Organized Compassion: History and Ethics of Humanitarianism. CZ, EI, SS Explores 
philosophical and theological conceptions of compassion, and the history and ethics of the ways in which 
compassion for distant strangers has been organized into humanitarian institutions, from 19th-century anti-
slavery movements to the International Committee of the Red Cross to the current international humanitarian 
order of UN agencies and countless NGOs like Médecins Sans Frontières, Save the Children, Oxfam, Care, 
Catholic Relief Services, and so on. Drawing on history, it will introduce students to the current landscape of 
humanitarian organizations and, through case studies, to the ethical quandaries the institutions face in the 
contemporary world. Instructor: Toole. One course. C-L: Global Health 541S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 560S, Human Rights
561. History of Poverty in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS A history of poverty and poverty policy in the 
United States from the colonial era to the present. The changing experience of poverty, efforts to analyze and 
measure poverty, and attempts to alleviate or eliminate it. Attention paid to the reasons for the durability of 
poverty in a wealthy nation and to the forces shaping the contours of anti-poverty policy. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: History 546, Public Policy 528, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 561, Human 
Rights
562S. Understanding Ethical Crisis in Organizations. EI, R, SS This course examines the causes and 
consequences of ethical crisis across business, military, higher education and religious institutions. Emphasis 
is on identifying why certain organizations are more prone to ethical problems and certain organizations better 
able to manage them. A core goal is to develop real-world solutions to ethical challenges organizations face in 
contemporary societies worldwide. Instructor: Pickus. One course. C-L: Political Science 502S, Sociology 542S, 
Public Policy 558S
565S. Attending to Persons in Pain. In this class, we aim to understand the roots of the various ways we 
attend to persons in pain today, and so to develop greater conceptual clarity and historical perspective on the 



Ethics (ETHICS) 385

diverse frameworks in which we encounter persons in pain. At the same time, we seek to nurture a recognition 
that attending to persons in pain threatens modes of control over that person’s reality and our own. Therefore, 
in this class we seek to foster an understanding that attending to persons in pain today, whatever the setting, is 
a fragile and fraught enterprise that nevertheless continually calls for creative and faithful responses. Instructor: 
McCarty. One course.
578S. Contemporary Theories of Democracy. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 578S
590. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Ethics. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
646S. Strategic Storytelling: Narratives for Development. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Public Policy 646S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 646S, Human Rights

Ethics Courses Offered through Other Departments
African & African American Studies
243. The Civil Rights Movement
Art History
381D. Global Art Since 1945
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
122. Islamic Civilization I
185. Islamic Civilization II
244. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
275. Chinese Philosophy
331S. Buddhist Ethics
373S. Islamic Mysticism
Civic Engagement and Social Change
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic Engagement
Classical Studies
322. Jesus and the Gospels
571S. Ancient Political Philosophy
Cultural Anthropology
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
256. Islamic Civilization I
257. Islamic Civilization II
Documentary Studies
268. Religion and Film
Economics
213. Follow the Ruble: Money in Russian Literature and Culture
361. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
361D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
Education
101. Social and Philosophical Foundations of Education
240. Educational Psychology
243S. Children, Schools, and Society
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic Engagement
408S. Teaching Practices in Elementary Language Arts and Social Studies
430S. Women and the Professions
496S. Secondary School Issues: Pedagogy, Culture, and Methods
Environment
147. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
277D. Global Art Since 1945
German
370. The Devil’s Pact: Faust and the Faust Tradition
History
106. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
210. Islamic Civilization I
211. Islamic Civilization II
251. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present
252. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
312. Europe’s Colonial Encounter, 1492-1992: Political Economy and International Thought
348. The Civil Rights Movement
Human Development
260. Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice



  386

331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
348. The Civil Rights Movement
International Comparative Studies
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
219D. Global Art Since 1945
275S. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals
312. Europe’s Colonial Encounter, 1492-1992: Political Economy and International Thought
380S. Islamic Mysticism
Jewish Studies
145. The Old Testament/Hebrew Bible
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
251. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
268. Islamic Civilization I
269. Islamic Civilization II
Philosophy
123FS. Freedom and Responsibility
207. Political and Social Philosophy
217. Introduction to Ethical Theory
218. Medical Ethics
246. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
246D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
263. Chinese Philosophy
571. Ancient Political Philosophy
584S. Modern Political Theory
Policy Journalism and Media Studies
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
Political Science
159. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
175. Introduction to Political Philosophy
175D. Introduction to Political Philosophy
175FS. Freedom and Responsibility
255. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
265S. Introduction to American Political Thought
268. Politics and Literature
272. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
275. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals
275S. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals
331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
331D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
388. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic Engagement
575S. Ancient Political Philosophy
578S. Contemporary Theories of Democracy
584S. Modern Political Theory
586S. Political Thought in the United States
Psychology
236. Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development
240. Educational Psychology
Public Policy
178. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
231. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
243S. Children, Schools, and Society
254. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
260S. Leadership, Policy, and Change
270S. Lead the Way Durham: Civic Engagement, Social Innovation, and Community Leadership in the Bull City
271S. Social Entrepreneurship in Action
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic Engagement
Religion
145. The Old Testament/Hebrew Bible
237. Religion in American Life
268. Religion and Film
321S. Buddhist Ethics
340. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present
351. Jesus and the Gospels
352. The Life and Letters of Paul
373S. Islamic Mysticism
375. Islamic Civilization I



Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH) 387

376. Islamic Civilization II
388S. Muslim Ethics and Islamic Law: Issues and Debates
Russian
318. Follow the Ruble: Money in Russian Literature and Culture
Science & Society
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
Sociology
260. Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development
430S. Women and the Professions
Visual and Media Studies
233. Religion in American Life
382D. Global Art Since 1945

Evolutionary Anthropology
Professor Alberts, Chair; Associate Professor of the Practice Digby, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Profes-
sors Churchill, Drea, Hare, Kay, Nunn, and Schmitt; Associate Professor Boyer, Pontzer, and Tung; Assistant Pro-
fessor Goldberg; Professors Emeriti Cartmill, Glander, and Pusey; Associate Professors of the Practice Digby and 
Williams; Research Professor Emeritus Wall; Secondary Appointments: Professors Alberts (Biology), Roth (Bi-
ology), Tomasello (Psychology), Wray (Biology), and Yoder (Biology); Adjunct Associate Professor Borths (Duke 
Lemur Center), Adjunct Instructor Holmes (School of Medicine); Senior Lecturing Fellows Doyle and Zeininger

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Evolutionary Anthropology is an interdisciplinary department centering on the origin and evolution of 

human beings and their close biological relatives. The department and its course offerings cover a variety of 
research areas including primate behavior, ecology, cognition and genetics; primate and human disease ecology; 
human genetics, energetics, and physiology; paleoanthropology; and functional and comparative anatomy. 
Opportunities for independent research exist in departmental laboratories, including the Canine Cognition Center 
and the Primate Locomotion Lab. Additional research opportunities can be found at the Duke Lemur Center and 
the Lemur Center’s Division of Fossil Primates.

Courses in Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Evolutionary Anthropology. NS, STS The study of human origins, anatomy, and 
behavior from an evolutionary perspective. The historical development of pre-Darwinian evolutionary thinking 
and Darwin’s contribution to evolutionary theory; genetics; microevolution and macroevolution; the modern 
synthesis framing the study of human origins and behavior in the context of modern evolutionary biology; 
primate behavioral ecology and evolution; a survey of primate and human paleontology, adaptation and 
variation; the origins of human social organization and culture; the impact of modern humans on biodiversity. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
101D. Introduction to Evolutionary Anthropology. NS, STS The study of human origins, anatomy, 
and behavior from an evolutionary perspective. The historical development of pre-Darwinian evolutionary 
thinking and Darwin’s contribution to evolutionary theory; genetics; microevolution and macroevolution; the 
modern synthesis framing the study of human origins and behavior in the context of modern evolutionary 
biology; primate behavioral ecology and evolution; a survey of primate and human paleontology, adaptation and 
variation; the origins of human social organization and culture; the impact of modern humans on biodiversity. 
Lecture is the same as Evolutionary Anthropology 101, but adds a 50 minute discussion section with hands-on 
access to fossil casts, etc. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190. Topics in Evolutionary Anthropology. Topics in evolutionary anthropology. Course intended for non-
majors. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Biological Anthropology and 
Anatomy. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Evolutionary Anthropology. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Special Topics. Special topics seminar open only to students in the Focus Program. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
212FS. Social Structures in an Evolutionary Framework. NS, STS Intersection between social 
structure, social behavior, and evolution. Role of social and historical factors in promoting evolutionary change 



 Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH)388

and the evolutionary history of social structures themselves, with an emphasis on humans and other primates. 
Topics include: evolution in modern human societies, evolutionary demography, genetic signatures of social and 
cultural change, the genetics of socially relevant traits, and social environmental effects on health. Open only to 
students in the FOCUS program. Instructor: Tung. One course. C-L: Genome Sciences and Policy 212FS
215S. Genetics and Genomics of Human Variation. CCI, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 260S
220. Human Evolution. NS Evolutionary biology of the hominidae. Anatomical and behavioral adaptations 
and phylogeny of fossils and living primates including Homo sapiens. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 
101 or equivalent. Instructor: Boyer, Churchill or staff. One course.
221S. Becoming Human. NS, R Evolution of key features that make human’s such unusual animals, 
including bipedalism, large brains, social complexity, language, the arts, and reliance on technology. Emphasis is 
on evidence from the prehistoric record but includes insights from genomics and living populations. Instructor: 
Williams. One course.
230. Bodies of Evidence: Introduction to Forensic Anthropology. NS, STS An introduction to 
medicolegal anthropology and death investigation. Topics include crime scene protocol and body recovery, 
basics of osteology, determining time since death, making personal identification, determining the manner 
and mode of death, postmortem modification of skeletal remains, protocols for mass disasters, human rights 
applications, and courtroom testimony. Open to both majors and non-majors. Instructor: Churchill. One course.
231L. Anatomy of the Lower Extremities. NS Introduction to the functional anatomy of the lower 
extremities. Students locate, identify, and dissect all major muscular, nervous, vascular, bony, and soft tissue 
structures using cadaveric specimens. Students participate in the dissection. Instructor: Leversedge. One course.
235L. Primate Anatomy. NS The comparative anatomy of primates from the perspective of adaptation and 
phylogeny. Laboratory includes study of bones, fossil casts, prosections of nonhuman primates. Prerequisite: 
Evolutionary Anthropology 101. Instructor: Staff. One course.
246. Sociobiology. NS, STS Sociobiological theory reviewed and applied to the social behavior of non-human 
animals, hominids, and humans; the evolution of altruism, cooperation, competition, mating strategies, parental 
care and morality. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or Biology 202L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
253. Primate Ecology. NS, R Ecological theory with an emphasis on primates. Primate diversity and 
biogeography, concept of the niche; dietary specializations, habitat use, predator-prey interactions, plant-
animal interactions, community ecology, human ecology; methods used in primate ecology; the role of ecology 
in conservation. Periodic labs (held during lecture hour) include methods used to characterize forests, tests 
of niche differentiation and morphological adaptations to different habitats. Prerequisite: Evolutionary 
Anthropology 101 or Biology 202L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
257. Ecology and Adaptation of Hunters and Gatherers. CCI, NS The ecology of extant and extinct 
foraging societies; focus on human behavioral solutions to subsistence problems associated with different 
environments (tropical/neotropical forest, boreal forest, coastal, arctic, grassland/savannah, desert). Topics 
include edible resource distribution in varied environments and its relationship to mobility and subsistence 
strategies in modern hunter-gatherers; and the archeological and fossil evidence for the evolution of human 
subsistence behavior. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or Biology 202L. Instructor: Churchill. One 
course.
260. Human Cognitive Evolution. NS, SS Survey of methods/theories used in the study of human 
cognitive evolution; development of cognition in children; brain damaged patients; cognitive abilities of great 
apes; paleoanthropology of early and modern humans and evidence for mental abilities and culture; cross-
cultural and sex differences in human cognition; genetics and the evolution of cognition. Recommended 
prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or Psychology 102. Instructor: Hare. One course. C-L: Psychology 
255, Neuroscience 260
285. Human Health in Evolutionary Perspective. NS, R, STS Covers evolutionary approaches 
to understand human health at a global scale. Integration of evolutionary thinking and medical science 
provides new insights to a wide array of medical issues including obesity, cancer, allergies, and mental illness. 
Evolutionary perspectives reveal why some pathogens are more harmful than others, shed light on the origins 
and spread of infectious diseases in humans, and help in controlling antibiotic resistance. Evolutionary 



Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH) 389

approaches provide insights as to why we age and provide solutions to alleviate human health problems that 
often differ from modern medical practice. Course will place these perspectives in the context of global health 
challenges. Instructor: Nunn. One course. C-L: Global Health 304
310. Primate Evolutionary Genetics. NS, R Genetic perspectives on primate evolution. Interpretation of 
molecular data in understanding primate origins, historical and present-day distributions, and natural selection. 
Topics include: the genetic signature of pathogen pressure; population differentiation and local adaptation to 
ecological differences; genetic signatures of admixture, including in the human lineage; molecular marker-based 
tests of kin-biased behavior and paternal care; primate behavioral genetics and genomics; phylogenetic methods 
to investigate the evolution of primate social structures; conservation genetics. Recommended prerequisite: 
Biology 201L, 202L, or 203L, or Evolutionary Anthropology 101. Instructor: Tung. One course. C-L: Biology 310
318. Human Evolutionary Genetics. NS, R An evolutionary perspective on human genetics and 
genomics, with an emphasis on current models and inference methods using medically important examples. 
The mechanisms of evolution shaping human genetic variation, as well as inference of evolutionary processes 
from genetic data. Topics include: population differences in disease risk; adaptation to local environments 
and pathogens; identifying regions of the genome underlying traits; models of neutral variation, migration, 
and genetic ancestry. Computational and quantitative skills will be emphasized throughout. Recommended 
prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101D, Biology 202, or equivalent; some probability and programming 
background helpful but not required. Instructor: Goldberg. One course. C-L: Biology 318
330. Human Physiology and Anatomy: An Evolutionary Perspective. NS Human physiology from a 
functional and evolutionary perspective. System-based and regional approach that differs from both a standard 
anatomy and physiology course by examining each system (musculoskeletal, digestive, cardiovascular, etc.) 
and regional units (liver, heart, lungs, etc.) from a functional standpoint, considering their anatomy and 
their physiological role together. This course further explores the evolutionary context of how and why our 
bodies function the way they do. Emphasis on human physiology. Recommended prerequisite: Evolutionary 
Anthropology 101 or introductory biology. Instructor: Pontzer and Ledogar. One course.
333L. The Human Body. NS Human gross anatomy seen from a functional and evolutionary perspective. 
Laboratory involving study of prosected cadavers and other anatomical preparations. Previous experience in 
anatomy (e.g., Primate Anatomy or Human Osteology) is recommended but not required. Instructor: Boyer or 
Kay. One course.
334L. Human Osteology. NS An introduction to the basics of human osteological analysis. Identification and 
siding of all the bones of the human body and the major osteological landmarks on each bone; basics of bone 
histology, development and growth; and fundamentals of anthropological analysis of human skeletal remains 
(archeological treatment of burials; determination of gender, populational affinities, stature; paleopathological 
analysis; medicolegal applications). Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or Biology 202L. Instructor: 
Churchill or Staff. One course.
336S. Dance Science: An Evolutionary Approach. ALP, NS, R Exploration of the origins of human 
dance through studies of non-human “dance” and entrainment, representations of dancing figures in the 
archaeological record, and evolutionary changes in the human body that allow for the extraordinary flexibility 
of human dance. Lab based studies of evolutionary changes in the human body. Learn about dance injuries and 
how the brain processes observed movement, as well as many other areas in which dance and science intersect. 
Instructor: Williams. One course. C-L: Dance 377S
341. Primate Sexuality. NS, STS A comparative and integrative study of primate sex and reproduction. The 
material is presented in three sections: the first focuses on primate social organization, mating systems, and 
reproductive strategies; the second focuses on the endocrine system and behavioral endocrinology, and; the 
third focuses on sexual differentiation of morphology, brain and behavior. In each section, this course places 
human sexuality within the broader context of the primate order. Prerequisites: Evolutionary Anthropology 
101D or Biology 202L or 203L. Instructor: Drea. One course. C-L: Biology 321
341D. Primate Sexuality. NS, STS A comparative and integrative study of primate sex and reproduction. 
The material is presented in three sections: the first focuses on primate social organization, mating systems, 
and reproductive strategies; the second focuses on the endocrine system and behavioral endocrinology, and; the 
third focuses on sexual differentiation of morphology, brain and behavior. In each section, this course places 
human sexuality within the broader context of the primate order. Note: course is the same as Evolutionary 



 Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH)390

Anthropology 341 but with an additional required 50 minute discussion. Recommended prerequisite: 
Evolutionary Anthropology 101D or Biology 202L or 203L. Instructor: Drea. One course. C-L: Biology 321D
344L. Primate Field Biology. NS, R, W Survey of field methods used to document primate behavior. 
Laboratory includes observations of free-ranging and captive primates at the Duke Lemur Center. Focus on the 
scientific process and writing of formal research papers. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or Biology 
202L. Instructor: Digby. One course.
347D. Behavioral Ecology and the Evolution of Animal Behavior. NS, R, STS, W One course. C-L: 
see Biology 267D
347D-1. Behavioral Ecology and the Evolution of Animal Behavior. NS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Biology 267D-1
359S. Primate Conservation. EI, NS, STS Concepts, practice, and ethics of conservation biology, both 
at the species and community level. Relevant aspects of biogeography, ecology, behavior and demography; 
human impact (deforestation, hunting); conservation strategies/policies (objectives, design of protected area 
networks, impact on local human populations). Impact of cultural, political, ethical considerations on primate 
conservation. Evolutionary Anthropology 101 recommended. Instructor: Staff. One course.
363S. Evolution of Primate Social Cognition. NS, R Social life of primates, with a focus on cognitive 
implications of social complexity. Primary emphasis on how social organization and social behavior influence 
the acquisition, expression, and transmission of information or knowledge. Topics include: tool use and 
causality; discrimination and insight learning; social influences on learning (for example, facilitation, inhibition, 
observation, imitation); knowledge of the social domain (individual recognition, kinship, hierarchies); 
coalitions, alliances, cooperation, and reciprocity; social conflict and reconciliation; traditions and cultural 
transmission; vocal and gestural communication; tactical deception and social manipulation; visual monitoring; 
intentionality; and instruction. Instructor: Drea. One course.
385D. Primate Disease Ecology and Global Health. NS, R, STS Covers concepts of disease ecology, with 
specific application to primates, human evolution, and global health. Explores the epidemiology and evolution 
of infectious diseases through the primary literature, focusing on infectious diseases of wild primates, humans, 
and other mammals. Students learn about the diversity of infectious diseases found in humans, and the basics of 
epidemiology, disease evolution and emergence, and primate behavioral ecology. Students also gain experience 
in thinking critically about scientific research, identifying interesting research questions, and communicating 
science to others. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101/101D or introductory-level biology. Instructor: 
Nunn. One course. C-L: Global Health 315D
385S. Primate Disease Ecology and Global Health. NS, R, STS, W Covers concepts of disease ecology, 
with specific application to primates, human evolution, and global health. Explores the epidemiology and 
evolution of infectious diseases through the primary literature, focusing on infectious diseases of wild primates, 
humans, and other mammals. Students learn about the diversity of infectious diseases found in humans, and 
the basics of epidemiology, disease evolution and emergence, and primate behavioral ecology. Students also 
gain experience in thinking critically about scientific research, identifying interesting research questions, and 
communicating science to others through a research project. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101/101D 
or introductory-level biology. Not open to students who have credit for Evolutionary Anthropology 385D. 
Instructor: Nunn. One course. C-L: Global Health 315S
390. Current Issues in Evolutionary Anthropology. Selected topics in methodology, theory, or area. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Biological Anthropology 
and Anatomy. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Topics in Evolutionary Anthropology. One 
course.
390L. Current Topics in Evolutionary Anthropology. Same as Evolutionary Anthropology 390 except in 
laboratory format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Current Topics in Evolutionary Anthropology. Same as Evolutionary Anthropology 390 except in 
seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Directed reading, tutorial, or individual project in Evolutionary Anthropology, 



Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH) 391

under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or other approved product. Open 
only to qualified students, who, before being given permission to register, must submit to the faculty advisor 
a written proposal outlining the area of study and listing course goals and meeting schedule. The area of 
study must be connected to discipline of Evolutionary Anthropology. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research under the supervision of a faculty member 
resulting in a substantive paper or written report. Projects typically include background research, formulation 
of hypotheses and predictions, data collection, data analysis and interpretation of results. Area of study must 
be connected to discipline of Evolutionary Anthropology. Open to qualified students, who, before being given 
permission to register, must submit to the faculty advisor a written proposal outlining the area of study and 
listing the goals and meeting schedule. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Advanced Current Topics in Evolutionary Anthropology. Current topics in Evolutionary 
Anthropology taught at the advanced level. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Advanced Research in Evolutionary Anthropology. NS, R, W Advanced research in Evolutionary 
Anthropology topic, typically leading to Graduation with Distinction. Course includes a one-hour weekly 
seminar on topics such as hypothesis testing, writing proposals, research design, data analysis with a strong 
emphasis on writing. Students will complete the introduction (literature review) and methods of their thesis 
along with a tentative results. Students are also expected to work with a faculty mentor conducting original 
research equivalent to a research independent study. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Digby. One course.
510SL. Molecular Anthropology in Practice. NS, R, W Hands-on introduction to research in molecular 
anthropology and primate genomics. Engagement in collaborative research on the use and interpretation of 
molecular data to understand primate evolution. Topics include: molecular and analytical tools for generating 
and interpreting genomic data; methods for identifying the signature of natural selection; basic computational 
and statistical methods for data analysis; research culture and collaboration in the natural sciences; 
scientific writing and revision. Prerequisite: Biology 202L or Evolutionary Anthropology 310 or Evolutionary 
Anthropology 514. Instructor: Tung. One course.
520S. Reconstructing the Past: The Paleobiology and Paleoecology of Primates. NS, 
R Interpretation of the paleobiology of extinct primates relies on indirect evidence linking morphology to 
particular attributes of a species’ ecological niche—be it diet, mode of locomotion, body size, sensory ecology, 
social systems, etc. Reconstructions require understanding the functional attributes of the anatomical systems 
of living primates followed by an inference by analogy about the behavior of the extinct ones. We examine 
similarities and differences in the primates living on different continents through time as well as contested 
paleoecological scenarios related to primate origins and ape and human origins. Recommended prerequisite: 
200-300 level course in paleontology, anatomy, or ecology. Instructor: Kay. One course.
522. The Hominin Fossil Record. NS Rigorous review of the fossil record of hominin evolution from the 
late Miocene to the end of the Pleistocene. Using primary literature and casts of key fossil specimens, students 
explore current controversies in the field of paleoanthropology. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 
and 220, or consent of instructor. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: Churchill. One course.
530. Human Functional Anatomy. NS Basics of functional morphology (including elementary 
biomechanics), an overview of connective tissue structure and mechanics, and a systematic overview (from head 
to toe) of human anatomy from a functional perspective. Emphasis on connective and other tissues involved 
in functioning of the musculoskeletal system (primarily bone, cartilage, tendons, ligaments, and muscle). 
Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 and 333L or 334L. Instructor: Churchill. One course.
546S. Primate Social Evolution. NS, R Ecological determinants of and biological constraints on social 
strategies and systems, with an emphasis on primates. Prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 101 and 200- or 
300-level behavior course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
560S. Primate Cognition. NS Advanced readings and discussion in the evolution of primate cognition. 
Topics include evolution of social tolerance, communication, cooperation, competition, etc.; role these behaviors 
play in the evolution of cognitive abilities. Instructor: Hare. One course.
561S. Evolution, Cognition, and Society. NS, STS Using primary literature in evolutionary anthropology 



 Evolutionary Anthropology (EVANTH)392

and cognitive science to discuss major societal events, behaviors, and issues. Topics include sex, prejudice, 
religion, music, abortion, illness, sexuality, global health, death, politics, economics and drugs. Emphasis on 
biological and cognitive perspectives to solving today’s biggest personal, local and global problems. Topics 
will change each semester; course can be taken more than once. Prerequisite: at least one course in behavior, 
ecology, or cognition at the 200+ level. Instructor: Hare. One course. C-L: Psychology 561S
570S. Energetics in Human Evolution, Ecology, and Health. NS, R Examine the role of energy 
expenditure in human evolution and ecology, including: 1) growth, reproduction, and aging, 2) metabolically 
costly organs such as the brain, and 3) daily physical activity. Discuss methods for measuring energy 
expenditure. Investigate the effects of diet and exercise on daily energy expenditure in humans. Discuss the role 
of energy expenditure in modern cardiometabolic disease (e.g., obesity, heart disease, and diabetes). Students 
will complete and present an independent research project on a topic related to the course. Recommended 
prerequisite: Evolutionary Anthropology 330, Biology 329D/L, or Biology 321. Instructor: Pontzer, Herman. 
One course.
580S. Ethics in Evolutionary Anthropology. EI, NS, STS Ethical issues and controversies in the study of 
evolutionary anthropology including treatment of primates in research; appropriate use of human genetic data, 
skeletal remains, and fossils. Professional ethics will also be addressed (e.g., ethical behavior in grant and paper 
reviewing, plagiarism, intellectual property). Course will make use of films, interviews and discussion primary 
and popular literature. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Williams. One course.
582S. Primate Adaptation. NS A study of primate adaptation from an evolutionary perspective. Topics vary 
according to student interests but may include history and functional significance of locomotor and feeding 
adaptations, craniofacial morphology, sense organs, reproductive systems, and language in primates, including 
humans. Seminar format but depending on topic may include laboratory analysis of materials. Prerequisite: 
200- or 300-level anatomy or morphology course and consent of instructor. Instructor: Williams or Kay. One 
course.
585. Statistical Rethinking: Methods and Applications in Evolutionary Anthropology and 
Biology. NS, QS, R Application of modern statistical methods in evolutionary anthropology and biology, 
including their theoretical foundations and application to phylogenetics, comparative methods, morphometrics, 
etc. The goal is to move from the limitations of frequentist statistical tests (i.e., p-values) and toward a richer 
assessment of scientific hypotheses, including Bayesian approaches. We will use a flipped classroom to provide 
hands-on team-based learning in R. Recommended prerequisite: 200- or 300-level Evolutionary Anthropology 
or Biology course and introductory statistics. Instructor: Boyer and Nunn. One course.
588S. Macroevolution. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 588S
590L-1. Special Topics Laboratory. Special topics in methodology, theory, or area. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590LS. Special Topics Laboratory. Special topics in methodology, theory, or area. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics. Special topics in methodology, theory, or area. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
652S. The Life and Work of Darwin. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 652S

The Major

For the AB Degree
Prerequisite. Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or 101D
Corequisite. Biology 202L
Major Requirements. Nine courses are required (not including the above pre and corequisites) of which 

eight courses must be 200-level or above and one course must be a capstone course (see pre-approved list in the 
departmental handbook). One course is required in each of the following areas: 1) human/primate paleontology 
or anatomy and 2) primate behavior or ecology (see listings in the Handbook for Majors). At least five courses 
must be taken in evolutionary anthropology; up to four courses may be taken in related departments based on 



Focus Program (FOCUS) 393

a preapproved list of electives or with preapproval by the director of undergraduate studies. One course must 
be a lab/field experience in evolutionary anthropology (research independent study may count toward this 
requirement). Note that no more than two independent studies may be counted toward the nine courses required. 
Evolutionary anthropology offers two optional concentrations (see below).

For the BS Degree
Prerequisite. Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or 101D
Corequisites. Biology 201L and 202L; Chemistry 101DL and 201DL; Mathematics 111; Physics 141L; 

introductory statistics (any level). Equivalent courses can be approved by the director of undergraduate studies.
Major Requirements. Eight courses numbered 200 or above are required (not including the above pre- and 

corequisites) of which one course must be a capstone course (see preapproved list in the Handbook for Majors). 
One course is required in each of the following areas: 1) human/primate paleontology or anatomy and 2) primate 
behavior, ecology or cognition (see listings in the Handbook for Majors). At least five courses must be taken in 
evolutionary anthropology; up to three courses may be taken in related departments based on a preapproved list 
of electives or as pre-approved by the director of undergraduate studies. One course must be a lab/field experience 
in evolutionary anthropology (research independent study may count toward this requirement). Note that no 
more than two independent studies may be counted toward the major. Evolutionary anthropology offers two 
optional concentrations.

Areas of Concentration
Students may elect to complete courses representing an in-depth study of a given area within evolutionary 

anthropology. There are currently three area concentrations available: 1) anatomy and paleoanthropology; 2) 
behavior, ecology, and cognition; and 3) human biology. Concentrations require that three of the five courses in 
evolutionary anthropology (as required by the major) be taken in the area of concentration. Preapproved courses 
for each area can be found in the Handbook for Majors. 

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
To qualify for the Graduation with Distinction program, students must have a GPA of 3.0 overall and 3.5 

within evolutionary anthropology. To earn distinction, students typically spend one year conducting independent 
research with a faculty mentor and writing a substantial senior thesis. Students must be enrolled in an independent 
study course within evolutionary anthropology. Exceptions must be approved by the director of undergraduate 
studies. Students must submit a brief (one- to two-paragraph) description of the honors project, the names of the 
faculty comprising the examination committee, and the signature of the student’s faculty mentor to the director 
of undergraduate studies by the end of the first week of classes of the student’s next-to-last semester (e.g., fall 
semester for May graduates). The examination committee should consist of three faculty members, at least two of 
whom are in the Department of Evolutionary Anthropology.

The Minor
Requirements. Evolutionary Anthropology 101 or 101D; one course in primate/human paleontology or 

anatomy; one course in primate behavior or ecology; two elective courses numbered 200 or above in evolutionary 
anthropology. Approved courses for each of the above subfields are listed in the Handbook for Majors.

Evolutionary Biology
See Biology on page 209. 

Focus Program
The Focus Program offers first-year students a variety of interdisciplinary course clusters in the fall and 

spring semesters; each cluster is centered on a common theme. For a list of current Focus Program course 
offerings, please refer to the Focus Program website at https://focus.duke.edu. 

Course in the Focus Program (FOCUS)
195FS. Special Topics in Focus. Forum for discussing and bridging the varied interdisciplinary issues that 

https://focus.duke.edu


 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)394

arise within the individual Focus Program seminars. May include group discussion, readings, guest lectures, 
film viewings, and other educational activities. Open only to participants in the Focus Program. Satisfactory/
Unsatisfactory grading only. Staff: Instructor. Half course.

French
For courses in French, see Romance Studies on page 718.

Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
Professor Wald (English), Director; Professors Grosz and Rudy; Associate Professors Hasso, Weeks, and Wilson; 
Assistant Professors Lamm, Rosenberg, and Douglass; Affiliated Faculty: Professors Allison (Cultural Anthropol-
ogy), DeFrantz (Dance), Deutsch (History), Edwards (History), Khanna (English), MacLean (History), McLarney 
(Asian & Middle Eastern Studies), Nelson (Cultural Anthropology), Piot (Cultural Anthropology), Wald (English), 
and Wiegman (literature); Associate Professors Olcott (History), Rojas (Asian & Middle Eastern Studies), and 
Sigal (History); Assistant Professors Hassan (Religious Studies), Lentz-Smith (History), and Namakkal (Inter-
national Comparative Studies); Adjunct Faculty: Associate Professor Curtain (University of North Carolina) and 
Assistant Professor Gokariksel (University of North Carolina)

A major and a minor are available in this program.
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies is part of a historical educational enterprise inaugurated by 

social movement and dedicated to the study of gender, sexuality, and justice as complex social phenomenon. 
In the field’s first decades, feminist scholarship reoriented traditional disciplines toward the study of women 
and gender and developed new methodologies and critical vocabularies that have made interdisciplinarity a key 
feature of gender, sexuality, and feminist studies as an autonomous field. Today, scholars continue to explore 
the meaning and impact of gender and sexual identification as primary—though by no means transhistorical 
or universal—ways of organizing social life by pursuing an intersectional analysis of gender, race, sexuality, 
class, and nationality. In the classroom, as in its research, its goal is to transform the university’s organization of 
knowledge by reaching across the epistemological and methodological divisions of historical, political, economic, 
representational, technological, and scientific analysis. In the program’s dual emphasis on interdisciplinarity and 
intersectionality, it offers students new knowledge about identity while equipping them with a wide range of 
analytical and methodological skills.

The courses listed below are offered by Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies or by other academic 
departments and programs. For a more detailed description of each course, contact the gender, sexuality, and 
feminist studies office or the appropriate department or program office.

Courses in Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)
80S. Special Topics in Writing. Various topics with diverse readings and intensive writing. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar in Gender Studies. New concepts and themes in gender and feminist studies. 
Topics may vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101S. Gateway Seminar: Gender and Everyday Life. CCI, EI, SS, W What is gender? How does it 
impact your everyday life? Designed to introduce students to the study of gender, sexuality, and feminism, this 
course will explore these questions by focusing on settings in which gender shapes how we live, work, consume, 
see ourselves, forge identities, relate to others, navigate institutions, and make ethical decisions. Students’ 
reflections on their own experiences and understanding of gender will be a consistent theme. How does gender 
define the social spaces we move through and inhabit? How does gender structure the various social institutions 
that shape our lives? In every part of the course, gender will be connected to race, sexuality, class, and nation. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
115. Introduction to the History of Women, Gender, and Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 115; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 115
122. History of Latinxs in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 122; also C-L: 
Latin American Studies 122, International Comparative Studies 122, Latin American Studies, Latino/a Studies 



Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF) 395

in the Global South
160S. Gateway Seminar: The Global Sixties: Race, Revolution, Sexuality. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One 
course. C-L: see History 160S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 160S
188S. Gateway Seminar: The Price of Sex: Gender and the Global Political Economy. CZ, EI, R, 
SS, W One course. C-L: see History 188S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 188S
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics in Focus. Seminar for students in Focus Program only. Topics vary each semester 
offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Women’s Studies. Seminar topics vary, focusing on interdisciplinary work arising 
from feminist scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
191FS. Intersections of the Sexual Brain. CCI, CZ, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 191FS; 
also C-L: Psychology 195FS, Study of Sexualities 191FS
195. Comparative Approaches to Global Issues. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 195; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 195, History 103, Political Science 110, Sociology 195
198. LGBTQ/Queer Cinema and Cultural Production. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 199; also C-L: Literature 199
199S. Thinking Gender: An Introduction to Feminist Theory. CCI, SS Introduction to foundational 
concepts in feminist thought on sex and gender. Survey of core concepts in the field of Women’s Studies and 
introduction to the fundamental debates within the history of feminist thinking. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Marxism and Society
202S. Introduction to LGBTQ Studies. CZ Topics include homosexuality and theory, history, law, religion, 
education, the arts and literature, the military, and the health sciences. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Study 
of Sexualities 199S
205. Science, Technology, Ethics, and Masculinity in American Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One 
course. C-L: see Science & Society 205
207. Sexuality, Bible, Church, and Controversy. Sexuality is an important element of human life, and 
religions typically have perspectives on sexuality and its ethics, yet all too often fail to discuss it. Course explores 
views and knowledges associated with Western Christianity on the topic, particularly with regard to typically 
controversial forms of sexuality such as “homosexuality.” The goal is to equip students to be up to date on 
historical, biblical, conservative, liberationist, postcolonial, and scientific and psychiatric perspectives on the 
topics, as well as ways to deal constructively with conflict in communities. Instructor: Fulkerson. One course.
208. The French Love Story. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see French 361; also C-L: Literature 262
209S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 219S; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 365S, History 225S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 224S, Cultural 
Anthropology 224S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219S
211S. Gender and Slavery in the Americas. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 213S; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 216S
212. Gender in Dance and Theatre. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 368; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 236, International Comparative Studies 215, Study of Sexualities
213S. Feminist Art from the 1970s to the Present. ALP, CCI, W A survey of feminist art from the 1970s 
to the present and the scholarship that informs and responds to it. Students become familiar with various 
strategies feminist artists have deployed to create images of women that resist the entrenched assumption of 
their lesser value. Focuses particularly on how the work of women artists draws attention to the effects of visual 
representations on perceptions and lived experiences of gender, sexuality, race, and class. Students will acquire 
a subtle and capacious understanding of feminist art as a creative, intellectual, and political project that engages 
with visual culture from multiple angles. Instructor: Lamm. One course. C-L: Art History 213S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 213S



 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)396

214. Contemporary Israeli Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
143; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 248, Literature 217, Jewish Studies 241, Islamic Studies
215. Cyborgs. CCI, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 213; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 241, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
216. Gender and Socialism. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 202; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 216
217. Gender and Culture. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 271; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 203, Study of Sexualities
220. Case Studies in Global Sexual and Reproductive Health. CCI, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Global Health 215
221. Women at Work: Gendered Experience of Corporate Life. CCI, SS, STS Analysis of gender, 
class and race in contemporary business organizations and roles of men and women within them. Management 
systems, information technology and human resource systems, as artifacts to larger, gendered environment. 
Instructor: Reeves. One course. C-L: Sociology 331
222. Gender and Philosophy. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 222
222S. Gender and Philosophy. One course. C-L: see Philosophy 222S
225. Women and the Political Process. R, SS A systematic analysis of the U.S. political system, electoral 
politics, platform implications, and leadership trends in the context of women’s role in political life, as voters, 
leaders, and citizens. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 203
226S. Writing American Politics. CZ, EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 276S; also 
C-L: African & African American Studies 233S, History 360S
229S. Space-Body-Image. ALP, CCI Analyzes ways the production of space in architecture and urban theory 
also produce images of the ideal bodies supposed to inhabit them. Explores limits of the production of space 
from standpoint of feminist, queer, and critical race theory, as well as through current research in disability 
studies. Surveys efforts by contemporary artists, writers, and filmmakers to interrupt prevailing images of space 
and imagine new kinds of bodies to move within them. Instructor: Eng. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 226S, Literature 229S
230. Women in the Economy. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 348; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 348
231S. Vampire Chronicles: Fantasies of Vampirism in a Cross-Cultural Perspective. ALP, CCI One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 413S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 406S, Study 
of Sexualities 231S
232. Gender and Language. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 364; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
232, International Comparative Studies 207, Linguistics 364
235S. Clinical Issues for the LGBTQ Community. CCI, SS An introduction to LGBTQ issues in the 
mental-health field and other people-focused professions, e.g. medicine, education, and law. An examination of 
the historical treatment of the LGBTQ population in psychological practice, the evolution of mental-health care 
for members of the LGBTQ community, and the psychological effects of social norms on LGBTQ individuals, 
couples, and families, including non-pathologizing, heterosexual bias, genderism, self-identification, coming 
out, multiple-minority identities, parenting, and couple dynamics. Instructor: Long. One course. C-L: Study of 
Sexualities 235S, Psychology 316S
237. African American Women and History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 349; also C-L: African 
& African American Studies 310, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 310, Human Rights
239. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 
374
239D. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
History 374D; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 239D, Human Rights
241. Gender, Work, and Organizations. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 229; also C-L: Markets 



Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF) 397

and Management Studies
245S. Women in Visual Arts. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 245S
248S. Book Publishing & Marketing: A Case Study of the Romance Fiction Industry. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, W One course. C-L: see History 248S; also C-L: English 284S
252S. Popular Fictions. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 345S; also C-L: English 375S
258S. Women and Power in the Renaissance. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 258S; also C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 248S, Romance Studies 258S
260. The Actress: Celebrity and the Woman. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Russian 383; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 323, International Comparative Studies 383
266. Gender and Sexuality in the Ancient World. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 
266
269SA. Gender and Immigration between Europe and the Middle East. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 379SA
270. Animals and Ethics: Welfare, Rights, Utilitarianism, and Beyond. CCI, EI, SS The ways 
humans depend on animals for a variety of products and information, with questions about the morality of 
specific uses. The origin of the contemporary animal rights movement through the lens of ethical theories, 
Kantianism, rights approaches, abolition, Peter Singer, and utilitarianism. The role of animal welfare through 
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, viewed internationally, including comparison of welfare versus rights 
agendas. Postmodern and feminist alternatives to existing theories. Animal law and the question of legal 
standing for animals. Benefits and limits of environmentalism as a mode of animal advocacy. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Public Policy 268
275. Food, Farming, and Feminism. CCI, EI, SS Viewing “agriculture,” “nature,” and “consumption” as 
pressing feminist themes and exploration of various dimensions of the cultural and political ecology/economy of 
producing, processing, circulating, preparing, and consuming sustenance. Particular focus on the ethical impact 
of US policy on rural farm communities and developing nations. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 
209, Global Health 225, History 221
276. Performance Art History and Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 344; also 
C-L: Information Science + Studies 275, Literature 222, Theater Studies 235
277D. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 382D; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 219D, Ethics Elective
277S. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 381S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 219S
278. Sex/Gender - Nature/Nurture: Intersections of Biology and Society. NS, STS Debates about 
sexuality, sex, and gender hinge on radically different ideas about relative effects of biological forces vs. social 
forces, or nature vs. nurture. Course changes terms of arguments about sexuality and gender and nature/
nurture. Explores how nature/nurture emerged as scientific and popular debate. Evaluates new developments 
in science and cultural fields that are now reconsidering how biology and environments interact. Showcases 
debates about how sex and sexuality are formed through interplay of genetic information, hormones, material 
bodies, and social environments. Instructor: Wilson, Williams. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 278, 
Neuroscience 278, Psychology 226, Study of Sexualities 278
279. Melodrama East and West. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 211; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 223
281. European Art 1900-1945. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 280; also C-L: Italian 384
290. Selected Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics vary, focusing on interdisciplinary work arising from 
feminist scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Selected Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics vary, focusing on interdisciplinary work arising from 
feminist scholarship. Study Abroad. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Selected Topics in Women’s Studies. Seminar version of GSF 290. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)398

290SA. Selected Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics vary, focusing on interdisciplinary work arising from 
feminist scholarship. Seminar version of 290A. Study Abroad. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a 
previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and program director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to juniors. Consent of instructor and program 
director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
296S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 295S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 295S, Religion 295S, International Comparative 
Studies 222S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 295S, Human Rights
298S. Global Humanitarianism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see International Comparative Studies 
398S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 298S
299. Hip Hop and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 248; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 248, English 299
301S. Theory Today: Introduction to the Study of Literature. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 
301S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 303S
306S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American 
South. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 362S; also C-L: African & African American 
Studies 245S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 362S, Human Rights
315SA. New York Scenes. ALP, R One course. C-L: see English 315SA; also C-L: Theater Studies 218SA, Art 
History 318SA, African & African American Studies 318SA, Jewish Studies 315SA
320. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 324, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 402, Information Science + Studies 302
320S. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302S; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 349S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 402S, Information Science + Studies 
302S
322S. Sex, Politics and Feminist Philosophy. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Political Science 372S
323SA. Transnational Muslims in Germany: Politics of Migration, Religion, and Culture. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 380SA; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 278SA, Cultural Anthropology 382SA, Religion 382SA
325S. Understanding Mediation. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Literature 325S; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 316S, English 480S, Theater Studies 249S, Documentary Studies 358S
333S. Bad Behavior. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 333S; also C-L: Sociology 330S
335S. Decolonization: Histories, Meanings, Struggles. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
International Comparative Studies 335S; also C-L: History 289S
338S. Women and Visual Media Studies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 389S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 386S
339S. Women and Film: Directors of the Diaspora. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 339S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 370S
350. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350; also C-L: Neuroscience 250, Latino/a 
Studies in the Global South 350, Romance Studies 350
350S. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350S; also C-L: Neuroscience 250S, 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 350S, Romance Studies 350S
351S. Adoption Ethics. CCI, EI, SS Since the beginning of human time, orphans have often been adopted 
by strangers. However, there are dozens of ways in which adoption can take place. The politics and ethics 



Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF) 399

of these adoptions can tell us a lot about the values and priorities of both sending and receiving countries. 
Orphans are produced as a result of war, poverty, national politics, drug use, crime, and many other kinds of 
tragedy; adoptive parents are often produced by ideologies surrounding the nuclear family, or simply the sense 
of “wanting a child.” The class will track down the mechanics of various kinds of domestic and international 
adoptions, and follow threads of argument to discover more about who we are. Instructor: Rudy, Duara. One 
course. C-L: Study of Ethics 351S
352S. Sex Work: The Politics of Sexual Labor. CCI, SS Sex work from the perspective of the labor and 
the purchase. Controversies over questions of gender and power, consent and coercion, sexual practices and 
labor contracts, trafficking and migration. Cultural representations of sex workers and their clients. Legal 
regimes from abolition to regulation and decriminalization. Instructor: Weeks. One course. C-L: Study of 
Sexualities 295S, Literature 295S, Sociology 295S
360S. Feminist Activism: Social Movements. CCI, CZ, SS, W Comprehensive introduction to feminist 
theoretical conceptions of the social, political, economic, and the human. Explores the rise of gender based 
discourses and social movements in the context of broader considerations of modernity, democracy, and liberal 
humanism and the value of rights discourse for feminist agendas. Includes a comparative dimension that 
emphasizes cross cultural and historical analysis. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 360S
361. Money, Sex, Power. CCI, CZ, SS Feminist research on gender dynamics in markets, economies, and 
capitalism. Includes empirical studies (e.g., historical, cross-cultural, and sociological research) and theoretical 
approaches to political-economic critique. Covered topics may include the gender, racial and transnational 
divisions of labor, the relation between work and family, waged household labor, sex work, sweatshop labor. 
Instructor: Wilson. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 361, Markets and 
Management Studies, Marxism and Society
362. Gender and Popular Culture. CCI, SS, W Same as GSF 362S except instruction is provided in lecture 
format. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 330
362S. Gender and Popular Culture. CCI, SS, W An analytic investigation of ways popular cultural forms 
produce and reinforce gender relations. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 331S
363S. Interpreting Bodies: Identity and Beyond. CCI, SS How the body has come to define the 
human in language, law, science, politics and economics. The body’s relation to identity and subjectivity. The 
representation of the body in particular cultural discourses and the social history and dynamic in which that 
representation has taken place. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 360S
364S. Race, Gender, and Sexuality. CCI, SS Gender’s relationship to race and sexuality explored through 
a variety of issues, including health, intimacy, family, the state, economic practices, transnational communities 
and identities, and social movement. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 264S, African & 
African American Studies 242S
365. Gender and Political Theory. CCI, SS Feminist analyses of and engagements with some of the 
canonical texts and traditional concepts of Western political theory. Feminist contributions to, challenges to, 
and revisions of the terms of key conceptual and political debates in political theory. Instructor: Weeks. One 
course. C-L: Political Science 383, International Comparative Studies 367
365S. Love, Marriage, Education: Theories About Women from Rousseau to Beauvoir. ALP, 
CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 365S; also C-L: Philosophy 274S, English 388S
366. Nature, Culture, and Gender. CZ, EI, NS Understanding human identity through a consideration of 
the human animal boundary, feminist primatology, animal welfare, the great ape project. Do women view nature 
differently than men? Ethics of primate research, primate gender roles, human justice and non-human animals, 
subjectivity and emotional lives of nonhuman animals, the relationship between gender, nature, and animals, 
new formulations of “nature/culture,” women and animals. Instructor: Rudy. One course.
366S. Nature, Culture, and Gender. CCI, EI, NS, SS Understanding human identity through a 
consideration of the human animal boundary, feminist primatology, animal welfare, the great ape project. Do 
women view nature differently than men? Ethics of primate research, primate gender roles, human justice and 
non-human animals, subjectivity and emotional lives of nonhuman animals, the relationship between gender, 



 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)400

nature, and animals, new formulations of “nature/culture,” women and animals. Instructor: Staff. One course.
367. Feminist Ethics. CCI, EI, SS Do women experience the world differently than men? An examination 
of women’s experience, women’s ways of knowing, ethical systems and feminist critique, patriarchy, dualistic 
thinking, gender oppression, care ethics, ethical dilemmas. Lecture version of GSF 367S. Instructor: Rudy. One 
course. C-L: Study of Ethics 204
367S. Feminist Ethics. CCI, EI, SS Do women experience the world differently than men? An examination 
of women’s experience, women’s ways of knowing, ethical systems and feminist critique, patriarchy, dualistic 
thinking, gender oppression, care ethics, ethical dilemmas. Instructor: Rudy. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 
204S
368. Gender, Sexuality, and Human Rights. CCI, EI, SS This course investigates gender and sexual 
dimensions of human rights, considering key international human rights campaigns and emphasizing the 
historical and philosophical contexts involved in advocacy for Women’s Human Rights and Sexual Rights. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 268, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 368, Human Rights
369. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS Explore feminist projects and approaches that cross a 
variety of borders. Under what conditions is solidarity across difference and inequality possible? This seminar 
examines this and other questions using relevant theories, film, and scholarship. Topics include activism, 
human rights, development, capitalism, war/militarization, racism, embodiment, and health. Assigned readings 
and films largely focus on the Global South but situate the Global North within circuits and relationships. The 
professor guides each student in preparing an original research paper on a relevant topic of interest to the 
student. Instructor: Hasso. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 208, Global Health 208, History 
249, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 369
369S. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS Explore feminist projects and approaches that cross a 
variety of borders. Under what conditions is solidarity across difference and inequality possible? This seminar 
examines this and other questions using relevant theories, film, and scholarship. Topics include activism, 
human rights, development, capitalism, war/militarization, racism, embodiment, and health. Assigned readings 
and films largely focus on the Global South but situate the Global North within circuits and relationships. 
The professor guides each student in preparing an original research paper on a relevant topic of interest to 
the student. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 208S, Global Health 208S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 369S, History 249S
370S. Queer Theory. ALP, CCI, SS A seminar designed specifically for advanced study in sexuality and 
gender. Contextualizes queer theory as a distinct analytic tradition by paying attention to poststructuralist 
approaches to subjectivity, sociality, power, and knowledge. This course also serves as the capstone required for 
the Certificate in the program in the study of sexualities. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 
470S, Literature 475S, Marxism and Society
372S. Freud and Sexuality. CCI, R, SS Introduction to central concepts in Sigmund Freud’s writings, 
focusing mainly on his understanding of sexuality, stages of child’s development through sexuality including 
development of the ego or sense of self, operations of the unconscious and genesis of sexual drives in the 
constitution of male and female subjects. Basic Freudian concepts explained through central feminist questions 
of sexuality and sexual difference. Instructor: Grosz. One course. C-L: Literature 260S, Study of Sexualities 
310S, Psychology 322S
373S. Freud and Feminism: The Unconscious. CCI, R, SS Introduction to Freud’s psychoanalytic 
accounts of the unconscious. How various gaps in consciousness explain symptoms, psychological disorders 
and dreams. Freud’s account of the unconscious and its relevance to theories of subjectivity, feminist theory and 
antiracist theory, expanding subjectivity to include otherwise marginalized or oppressed social groups. How 
Freud’s writings have been taken up by other leading intellectual figures, including Lacan, Irigaray, Kristeva, 
Derrida, and Deleuze and Guattari. Instructor: Grosz. One course. C-L: Literature 261S
374S. Global Men and Masculinities. CCI, SS, W Masculinities examined historically, theoretically and 
transnationally; attentive to sexual differences, racism, class stratifications, colonialism, and imperialism; 
draws from history, sociology, feminist geography, critical theory, and visual culture; interactive lectures and 
guest scholars. Each student guided to complete an oral history/interview research project with male-identified 



Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF) 401

persons. Instructor: Hasso. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 274S, Sociology 375S, History 
229S, Literature 374S
375. Reproductive Ethics. EI, SS, STS This class examines the role that technology, globalization, late 
capitalism, ideas about health and ability, and advances in feminist theory play in human reproduction. It will 
investigate new frontiers of reproductive technology, and try to understand the many different ways of using and 
viewing interventions such as IVF, surrogacy, and embryo selection. We will examine popular ideas about “the 
perfect child,” and how the issue of abortion intersects and competes with the quest for healthier, able-bodied 
children. Instructor: Rudy. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 375
376S. Black Feminist Theory. CCI, CZ, R, SS The course explores canonical and contemporary texts to 
consider how various theorists inform, challenge, and extend understandings of what constitutes the social and 
political realms. Topics for the course include, but are not limited to: life, death, violence, sociality, politics, and 
the Human. Instructor: Douglass. One course.
385S. Women in the Public Sphere: History, Theory and Practice. CCI, SS, W Why and how women 
who seek to practice leadership in public life operate within broad historical and theoretical contexts. Examine 
how American women have exercised leadership for social change over the last two centuries. Analyze current 
debates about gender and leadership in academic literature and the popular press, and discuss the opportunities 
and challenges facing women today. Explore the relationship between theory and practice by applying theory 
to current-day issues. This course serves as the preferred gateway course for The Moxie Project: Women and 
Leadership for Social Change (DukeEngage—8 weeks in NYC working with a local or national organization 
serving women and girls). Instructor: Seidman. One course. C-L: Public Policy 225S
386S. Politics of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Explores intersections among sexual identity, desire, and 
behavior and political institutions, public policy, and concepts of citizenship. Readings and methods will be 
interdisciplinary and will examine politics of sexuality in diverse sociocultural, international, and historical 
contexts. Topics may include: social movements; laws, policing, and incarceration; medicalization and eugenics; 
militarism and geopolitics; immigration and human rights; welfare policies; nationalism and citizenship; and 
reproductive rights. Instructor: Rosenberg. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 386S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 386S, Public Policy 383S, History 346S
387. Moral Panics, Spectacle, and Everyday Life: Social Anxieties and Minorities. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 387; also C-L: Literature 387
390. Special Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics vary, focusing on interdisciplinary work arising from 
feminist scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics vary, focusing on interdisciplinary work arising from 
feminist scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401. Gender and the Law. CCI, EI, SS Examination of issues at the intersection of gender and law through 
a number of different theoretical lenses. Analyzes policy problems with gender implications from the perspective 
of formal equality, substantive equality, nonsubordination theory, different voice theory, autonomy, and various 
poststructural critiques. Engages theory at the level of concrete, easily accessible ethical and policy issues, 
including such topics as employment equality, pregnancy, domestic violence, rape, reproductive rights, sexual 
orientation and sexual identity discrimination, family equality, sexual harassment, pornography, education 
equality, affirmative action, and the justice system. Instructor: Bartlett. One course. C-L: Literature 430, Public 
Policy 315, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 401
402S. James Baldwin and Toni Morrison. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 399S; also 
C-L: English 380S, African & African American Studies 322S
412S. Capstone Seminar - Globalization: Asia and Asian America. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see History 454S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 407S, International Comparative Studies 
412S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 437S
415S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 415S; also C-L: Literature 415S, Cultural Anthropology 415S, Visual and Media 
Studies 416S, International Comparative Studies 415S
420S. De l’Horrible Danger de la Lecture / On the Terrible Danger of Reading. ALP, CCI, FL One 



 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)402

course. C-L: see French 420S
432S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 432S; also 
C-L: Study of Sexualities 432S, International Comparative Studies 428S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 428S, Human Rights
438S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 438S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 438S, International 
Comparative Studies 407S, Study of Sexualities 438S, Visual and Media Studies 438S, Literature 438S, 
International Comparative Studies
439. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 439; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 439, Literature 439, Visual and Media Studies 439
490. Advanced Topics in Women’s Studies. Lecture version of GSF 490S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Advanced Topics in Women’s Studies. Topics vary, focusing on advanced interdisciplinary work 
arising from feminist scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Honors Independent Study. R Open to students pursuing distinction. Individual research in a field 
of special interest under the supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or 
written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to seniors. 
Consent of instructor and program director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Honors Independent Study. R See GSF 493. Open to seniors. Consent of instructor and program 
director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Latino/as in the Global South Capstone - Global/Local Contexts. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Latino/a Studies in the Global South 495S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 495S, Latin American Studies 
495S, Romance Studies 495S
499S. Senior Seminar in Women’s Studies. CCI, R, W Advanced research course for majors in Women’s 
Studies. Topics vary by semester. Students produce a significant research paper. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
501S. History of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 501S
502S. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 539S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 539S, Literature 539S, Visual and Media Studies 539S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 539S, Human Rights
503S. Cartographies of Gender and Sexuality in Middle East. R, SS This interdisciplinary graduate 
seminar brings the field of Middle East gender and sexuality studies into productive collision with Western “new 
materialist” approaches to consider how they might inform each other; explores theories and practices related 
to archives and archival methodologies; and engages some of the latest scholarship on states, family, sex and 
sexuality. Students may use the final course assignment to develop a broadly relevant research proposal or paper 
using original sources, or to prepare for publication an essay or article that puts their intellectual interests in 
dialogue with the focus of the seminar. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: Hasso. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 503S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 527S
505S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 515S; also C-L: Literature 515S, Visual and Media Studies 515S, International 
Comparative Studies 515S
509S. Race, Class, and Gender: A Social History of Modern (1750-present) Britain. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see History 505S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 515S
515S. Gender, Identity, and Public Policy. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 530S; also C-L: 
Political Science 521S
519S. Topics in Sexuality and Gender Studies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 585S
581S. Masculinities. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 540S
584S. Global History of Medicine. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 548S; also C-L: Global 
Health 548S



Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF) 403

590. Topics in Feminist Studies. Lecture version of GSF 590S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies. A seminar in contemporary issues, methodology, and/or 
selected theoretical questions pertaining to feminist scholarship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
601S. Debates in Women’s Studies. This course is designed for Master’s and Professional Schools students 
and for PhD students with little or no background in feminist scholarship. It introduces students to the basic 
conceptual tools of feminist inquiry by way of an examination of some of the key debates in feminist studies. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
611S. Film Feminisms. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Literature 611S
615S. The #Selfie. CZ, EI, R, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 615S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
615S, International Comparative Studies 615S

Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies Courses across Disciplines
The following courses count toward a major or minor when taught by faculty affiliated with gender, sexuality, 

and feminist studies and/or approved by a gender, sexuality, and feminist studies faculty advisor. There are 
additional courses that count toward the major, and students should contact the Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies office for additional information.
Art History
288. Dada and Surrealism
Cultural Anthropology
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
250. Muslim World: Transformations and Continuities
271. Gender and Culture
English
750. Studies in Renaissance Literature
History
374. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History
800. Colloquia
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
211. Social Inequality
International Comparative Studies
170. Muslim World: Transformations and Continuities
203. Gender and Culture
Jewish Studies
140. Judaism
271. Sex and Gender in the Hebrew Bible
Linguistics
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
Literature
316S. Film Theory
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
655. Early Christian Asceticism
Philosophy
222. Gender and Philosophy
503S. Contemporary Ethical Theories
Political Science
582S. Contemporary Ethical Theories
Psychology
220. The Psychology of Gender
Religion
140. Judaism
271. Sex and Gender in the Hebrew Bible
328. Buddhism and Sexuality
367. Women and Sexuality in the Christian Tradition
380. Muslim World: Transformations and Continuities
634. Early Christian Asceticism
Russian
512. Women and Russian Literature
Sociology
160. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
211. Social Inequality
218. Sex, Gender, and Society
225. Intimate Inequalities: The State of American Families



 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)404

349. Sexuality and Society
355. Organizations and Management
Visual and Media Studies
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
298S. Film Theory

Courses in Study of Sexualities (SXL)
Courses in the study of sexualities introduce students to critical analyses of the various expressions of 

sexuality in societies around the world, both past and present. Such expressions encompass a wide range from 
heterosexuality to homosexuality and include other erotic desires, sexual relationships, and gender roles. Critical 
analyses concern how sexuality is formed, defined, and regulated by biological and social forces. 
89S. First Year Seminar. One course.
115. Introduction to the History of Women, Gender, and Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 115; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 115
116. Sexual Pleasure in the Modern World. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see History 112
160S. Gateway Seminar: The Global Sixties: Race, Revolution, Sexuality. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One 
course. C-L: see History 160S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 160S
190S. Seminars in Selected Topics. One course.
191FS. Intersections of the Sexual Brain. CCI, CZ, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 191FS; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 191FS, Psychology 195FS
199S. Introduction to LGBTQ Studies. CZ One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
202S
229. Sexuality and Society. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 349
231S. Vampire Chronicles: Fantasies of Vampirism in a Cross-Cultural Perspective. ALP, CCI One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 413S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 406S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 231S
235S. Clinical Issues for the LGBTQ Community. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 235S; also C-L: Psychology 316S
264S. Race, Gender, and Sexuality. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
364S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 242S
268. Gender, Sexuality, and Human Rights. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 368; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 368, Human Rights
278. Sex/Gender - Nature/Nurture: Intersections of Biology and Society. NS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 278; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 278, Neuroscience 278, 
Psychology 226
290. Selected Topics. One course.
290S. Seminars in Selected Topics. One course.
295S. Sex Work: The Politics of Sexual Labor. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 352S; also C-L: Literature 295S, Sociology 295S
310S. Freud and Sexuality. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 372S; 
also C-L: Literature 260S, Psychology 322S
377. Global History of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 377
386S. Politics of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 386S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 386S, Public Policy 383S, 
History 346S
432S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 432S; also 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 432S, International Comparative Studies 428S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 428S, Human Rights



Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF) 405

438S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 438S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 438S, International 
Comparative Studies 407S, Visual and Media Studies 438S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 438S, 
Literature 438S, International Comparative Studies
470S. Queer Theory. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 370S; also 
C-L: Literature 475S, Marxism and Society

Study of Sexuality Courses Offered through Other Departments
Cultural Anthropology
271. Gender and Culture
Dance
368. Gender in Dance and Theatre
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
212. Gender in Dance and Theatre
217. Gender and Culture
International Comparative Studies
203. Gender and Culture
Literature
365S. Love, Marriage, Education: Theories About Women from Rousseau to Beauvoir
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
655. Early Christian Asceticism
Religion
367. Women and Sexuality in the Christian Tradition
634. Early Christian Asceticism
Sociology
218. Sex, Gender, and Society
Theater Studies
236. Gender in Dance and Theatre

House Courses. Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies regularly sponsors house courses. While house 
courses do not officially count toward the major or the minor, students are strongly encouraged to consider them 
as valuable supplements to full-credit courses. Lists of house courses are available in the program office at the 
beginning of each semester.

The Major
To major in gender, sexuality, and feminist studies, a student must take a minimum of ten courses. Gender, 

Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 199S (Thinking Gender: An Introduction to Feminist Theory) and a senior seminar 
(Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 490S) are required, along with four of the following: 
360S. Feminism in Historical Context 
361. Money, Sex, Power 
361S. Money, Sex, Power 
362. Gender and Popular Culture 
362S. Gender and Popular Culture 
363S. Interpreting Bodies: Identity and Beyond 
364S. Race, Gender, and Sexuality
365. Gender and Political Theory
366S. Nature, Culture and Gender
367S. Feminist Ethics
368S. Gender, Sexuality and Human Rights
369S. Transnational Feminism
370S. Queer Theory
371S. Gender, Sexuality, and the Image

The remaining four elective courses must be at or above the 200 level and may be chosen from other 
gender, sexuality, and feminist studies offerings. Students may also petition for credit for courses offered in other 
departments and programs, with clear documentation of their intellectual value to the overall goals of the major. 
Students may take no more than two independent study courses, which must be approved by the director of 
undergraduate studies.



 Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies (GSF)406

Advising
Each year, faculty affiliated with Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies serve as advisors for students 

majoring in gender, sexuality, and feminist studies. Majors are paired with faculty advisors on the basis of 
students’ general areas of interest. Students majoring in gender, sexuality, and feminist studies are encouraged 
to seek out and work with any of the Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies faculty in addition to their primary 
faculty advisor.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Qualified students earning a major in gender, sexuality, and feminist studies may be eligible for Graduation 

with Distinction. More detailed guidelines are available in the program office. Students interested in being 
considered for distinction should contact the program office no later than the spring of their junior year.

The Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies Minor
For the minor, students complete five courses. Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 199S (Thinking 

Gender: An Introduction to Feminist Theory) is required, along with two courses from the following: 
360S. Feminism in Historical Context 
361. Money, Sex, Power 
361S. Money, Sex, Power 
362. Gender and Popular Culture 
362S. Gender and Popular Culture 
363S. Interpreting Bodies: Identity and Beyond 
364S. Race, Gender, and Sexuality
365. Gender and Political Theory
366S. Nature, Culture and Gender
367S. Feminist Ethics
368S. Gender, Sexuality and Human Rights
369S. Transnational Feminism
370S. Queer Theory
371S. Gender, Sexuality, and the Image

In addition, students choose two elective courses at or above the 200 level from other in Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies offerings. Students may also petition for credit for courses offered in other departments and 
programs, with clear documentation of their intellectual value to the overall goals of the major. Students may take 
no more than two independent study courses, which must be approved by the director of undergraduate studies.

The Minor in Sexuality Studies 
For the minor in sexuality studies students complete five courses: the required Sexuality Studies 199S 

(Introduction to the Study of Sexualities) and four electives listed as SXL. Of the four electives, one must be a 
seminar at the 300 level or above. One of the following can count as an elective, with permission of the director 
of undergraduate studies: (a) an independent study, including thesis writing or research, on a topic focused on 
sexuality studies; (b) a study abroad course with 50% or more focus on sexuality-studies themes; or (c) a relevant 
course offered by another unit (not cross-listed with SXL), with clear documentation of its intellectual value to the 
overall goals of the minor.

In addition to offering courses, and a major and minor representing a focus in gender, sexuality, and feminist 
studies, the program sponsors lectures, films, discussions, conferences, and work-study opportunities. Additional 
information on courses, the gender, sexuality, and feminist studies major or minor, and other opportunities in 
gender, sexuality, and feminist studies is available at the gender, sexuality, and feminist studies office, 210 East 
Duke Building, or on the website at https://gendersexualityfeminist.duke.edu/.

Genetics
See Science & Society on page 750; see the University Program in Genetics and Genomics on page 813; 

or see the genetics area of concentration in Biology on page 209. 

https://gendersexualityfeminist.duke.edu


 (GERMAN) 407

German Studies
Professor Engelstein, Chair; Assistant Professor Pourciau, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Associate Profes-
sor of the Practice Crane, Director of the Language Program; Professors Engelstein and Pfau; Associate Profes-
sors Gellen, Norberg, and Pickford; Assistant Professor Pourciau; Professors Emeriti Morton, Rasmussen, and 
Rolleston; Associate Professor of the Practice Crane; Professor of the Practice Emerita Walther; Lecturing Fellow 
Freytag; Adjunct Assistant Professor Madden; Adjunct Associate Professor of the Practice Wohlfeil; Instructors 
Dolan and Henry

A major and a minor are available in this department.
The department offers courses in German, as well as courses taught in English where no knowledge of 

German is required. For courses taught in German see the section immediately below. 
For courses taught in English see page 411.

Courses in German Studies (GERMAN)

Courses Taught in German
29. Advanced Placement in German. One course credit for Advanced Placement in German. One course.
101. First-Year German I. FL First-semester introductory language course. Practice in spoken and written 
German (speaking, listening, reading, writing); introduction to German culture and society through film, music, 
literature, and other authentic materials. Communicative approach to language study focuses on learning to use 
German in meaningful contexts across a variety of real-life situations and genres. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. First-Year German II. FL Second-semester introductory language course. Practice in spoken and 
written German (speaking, listening, reading, writing); introduction to German culture and society through film, 
music, literature, and other authentic materials. Communicative approach to language study focuses on learning 
to use German in meaningful contexts across a variety of real-life situations and genres. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
111. Intensive First-Year German. FL Intensive, introductory course combines first two semesters of 
German language instruction. Introduction to language and culture of modern German-speaking world. 
Practice in spoken and written German (speaking, listening, reading, writing) across variety of everyday, 
real-life situations and genres. Course takes functional communicative approach focusing on development 
of interpersonal, interpretive, and presentational skills. No previous German language study required. Ideal 
for highly motivated students and those interested in refreshing knowledge of foundational grammar and 
vocabulary structures. Instructor: Freytag. Two courses.
111A. Intensive First-Year German. FL Intensive introduction to German language and culture. Combines 
in one semester the work of German 101-102. Taught only in the Duke-in-Berlin Fall Semester Program. 
Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
203. Intermediate German I. CZ, FL Intermediate-level German course continuing instruction begun in 
German 102. Focus on developing German language abilities and expanding cultural knowledge through topic-
oriented syllabus on cultures of the German-speaking world. Comprehensive review of grammar, vocabulary 
building, with continued practice in speaking, reading, listening, and writing. Literary and nonliterary texts from 
a variety of media provide basis for discussion and cultural awareness. Recommended prerequisite: German 
101-102, 111, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
204. Intermediate German II. CZ, FL Intermediate-level German course continuing instruction begun 
in German 203. Practice in spoken and written German (speaking, listening, reading, writing); introduction 
to German culture and society through film, music, literature, and other authentic materials. Communicative 
approach to language study focuses on learning to use German in meaningful contexts across a variety of real-
life situations and genres. Instructor: Staff. One course.
210. Intermediate Conversation Practice. Develop speaking skills for everyday language interactions, 
including expressing opinions and formulating arguments. Grade based on participation, vocabulary quizzes, 
role plays. Prerequisite: German 101 and 102 (or equivalent). Enrollment in German 203 or 204 encouraged but 
not necessary. Does not satisfy the foreign language requirement, or requirements for German major/minor. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.



  (GERMAN)408

212A. Intensive Intermediate German. CZ, FL Intensive grammar review and practice of spoken and 
written German, combining in one semester the work of one year of intermediate German. Taught only in the 
Berlin Fall Semester Program. Prerequisite: German 101-102, 111, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
213A. Intensive Intermediate German for Engineers. CZ, FL Development of German language 
proficiency (reading, listening, speaking, and writing), with focus on the acquisition of specialized vocabulary in 
the fields of engineering, technology, mathematics, and other natural science disciplines. Includes investigation 
of history and culture of Berlin, with focus on major political, economic, social, and cultural developments since 
the fall of the Wall. Materials from various sources (scientific texts and problem sets, print media, audio/video 
material). Taught at the Technical University in Berlin. Offered only in the January term of the Duke-in-Berlin 
spring semester program. Prerequisite: German 102, 111, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
220A. Readings in German Literature. ALP, FL Development of written and oral proficiency in German, 
as well as the vocabulary and analysis tools needed for poetry and short prose. Intended for intermediate 
language learners beginning to work with German literature. Prerequisite: German 203 or equivalent. Taught in 
the Duke Summer in Berlin program. One course.
222SA. Capturing the City: Documentary Photography in Berlin. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 171SA; also C-L: Visual Arts 171SA, Visual and Media Studies 171SA
262P. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney - Preceptorial 
in German. A preceptorial (discussion section), in German, to accompany the course on Romantic Fairy Tales 
from Grimms to Disney (German 262). This non-credit preceptorial is designed for German majors, minors, and 
other students who are able to discuss the material in German. Requires concurrent enrollment in German 262. 
Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. Students who enroll in this preceptorial will be able to count German 
262 towards the German major or minor as a course taught in German. Note: This preceptorial does not fulfill 
the Trinity College foreign language requirement. Further information available from the instructor. Instructor: 
Norberg or Henry.
303AS. Advanced German in Berlin. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Texts drawn from various media centered largely 
on contemporary Berlin. Development of written and oral proficiency in German, as well as insight into the 
cultural and historical aspects of the capital. Intensive practice of sentence structure and expository writing. 
Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. May substitute for German 305S or 306S to fulfill major requirement. 
Taught only in the Duke Summer in Berlin program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
305S. Advanced German I: Culture and Society. CCI, CZ, FL Development of advanced proficiency in 
oral and written communication. Expansion and deepening of cultural literacy and interpretive skills by focusing 
on issues of social, cultural, and political significance in German-speaking countries. Cultural and literary texts 
from a variety of media and genres analyzed in social and cultural contexts. Intensive work on vocabulary, 
sentence structure, and patterns of expression. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. Not open to native 
speakers of German. Instructor: Staff. One course.
306S. Advanced German II: Text and Context. ALP, CZ, FL, W Development of advanced German 
language proficiency, with particular attention to written expression. Emphasis on stylistic variation, complex 
grammatical structures, and lexical sophistication (vocabulary building). Analysis of authentic texts from 
a variety of genres will provide the basis for practice in creative, descriptive, narrative, argumentative, and 
analytical writing. Prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. Not open to native speakers of German. Instructor: 
Gellen or staff. One course.
310. Advanced Conversation Practice. Practice speaking in wide array of formal and informal situations. 
Expand vocabulary and idiomatic speech. Topics include current events, practical needs, German culture, 
using authentic texts from variety of media and genre. Grade based on participation, quizzes, presentations. 
Prerequisite: German 204 (or equivalent). Does not satisfy the foreign language requirement, or requirements 
for German major/minor. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
312AS. Advanced Intensive German Language and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, W Development 
of advanced proficiency with particular emphasis on speaking and writing. Through analysis of literary and 
nonliterary texts, excursions, museums, films, theater performances, students gain in-depth knowledge 
of various aspects of German culture and society. Advanced grammar review, vocabulary building, oral 
presentations, as well as a variety of writing assignments. Taught only in the Berlin program. Prerequisite: 



 (GERMAN) 409

German 204, 212, 212A, or equivalent. Fulfills major requirement for German 305S and German 306S. 
Instructor: Wohlfeil. Two courses.
319AS. Advanced Intensive German. CCI, CZ, FL For advanced students to increase all four language 
skills: comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Discussion of current events from a German cultural 
perspective based on newspaper articles, radio and television reports. Preparation for the German language 
examination required of all foreign students enrolling at German universities. Equivalent of German 305S or 
306S, but offered only in the Berlin semester program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
323S. Dwarves, Dragon-Slayers, and Werewolves: Germanic Myths and Legends. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, FL Exploration of ancient Germanic fantasy worlds with their gods, giants, dwarves, dragon-slayers, 
werewolves, shapeshifters, and witches. Readings of short texts and excerpts from myths, epics, legends, fairy 
tales, riddles, and incantations. Where do the figures, beasts, creatures appear and what cultural concerns do 
they represent. Concluding look at the survival and continuation of the Germanic tradition in modern and 
contemporary fantasy, from Tolkien to The Game of Thrones. Instructor: Norberg. One course.
325A. Current Issues and Trends in Germany. CCI, CZ, FL Topics of social and cultural significance in 
contemporary Germany, with particular emphasis on media and society. Includes site visits. Offered in the Duke 
Summer Program in Berlin. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
331T. Voices in Philosophy: German. Half course. C-L: see Philosophy 331T
334S. Projekt Theater: German Theater and Performance. ALP, FL Collaborative and interactive 
theater course for students of German. Students read, interpret, and stage selected German language plays. 
Special attention given to reading and oral communication skills, interaction and performance. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Theater Studies 325S
335S. Modern German Theater and Drama. ALP, CCI, FL Introduction to some major works of theater 
and drama of German-speaking central Europe, especially as they attempt to address contemporary social 
issues. Emphasis primarily on 20th century theater and drama. Authors include Bertolt Brecht, Friedrich 
Dürrenmatt, Peter Weiss, Peter Handke, Elfriede Jellinek and others whose experiments with dramatic form 
have drawn international attention. Discussions will explore the relationships between texts and their various 
theatrical performances on the stage and screen, as well between dramatic form and social-historical context. 
Final project may include performance of scenes from different plays. Taught in German. Instructor: Walther. 
One course. C-L: Theater Studies 223S, International Comparative Studies
340S. Contemporary Culture through the German Media Landscape. CCI, CZ, FL This course 
examines contemporary cultural trends in German society through the lens of the German media landscape. 
Students will continue to develop their competencies in German at an advanced level by discussing 
and analyzing current issues and debates, with an emphasis on vocabulary building through oral and 
written response and analysis. Topics will vary based on current events, but may include politics, arts and 
entertainment, business, education, multiculturalism, Germany’s role in Europe and the world, among others. 
Recommended prerequisite: German 303, 305, 306, or permission of instructor. Instructor: Freytag. One 
course.
350S. The Image of America in German Culture. ALP, CCI, FL An advanced German course about the 
image of America in twentieth- and twenty-first-century Germany. Popular and highbrow representations, in 
their historical, political, and social contexts. Topics include: American settler myths (“Cowboys & Indians,” 
pioneers); American film genres (the Western, the road movie); American progress and modernity; American 
brands in German society (Disney, Ford, Coca-Cola, Hollywood); the critique of American media, consumerism, 
and hegemony. Materials include literature, film, TV shows, comics, newspaper and magazine articles, and 
advertising. Taught in German. Recommended prerequisite: German 305, 306, or equivalent. Instructor: Gellen. 
One course.
352AS. Berlin in Literature and Culture. ALP, CCI, FL Literary works of modern German writers; focus 
on the city of Berlin and its unique cultural and political heritage due to Germany’s division from 1945 to 1989. 
Emphasis on art and architecture of Berlin reflecting both historical trends and political ideologies such as 
National Socialism and Marxism. Taught only in the Berlin semester program. Instructor: Wohlfeil. One course. 
C-L: International Comparative Studies
354SA. Contemporary Art in Berlin. ALP, CCI, FL Overview of the main locations, events and 



  (GERMAN)410

protagonists of the contemporary Berlin art scene. Examination of art in its omnipresence in the urban 
environment; includes explorations of street art, art in public spaces, museums, private collections, galleries, 
studios and art academies. Taught only in the Duke-in-Berlin study abroad program. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
358S. Sociolinguistic Landscapes: German Language, Society, and Identity. CCI, CZ, FL, 
SS Introduction to German sociolinguistics. Explores socio-cultural aspects of German language variation 
(spatial, chronological, social) and construction of social identities through language. Questions addressed: 
What is the German language, who are its speakers, and what do standard and non-standard varieties look like? 
How has German evolved, how does it continue to develop, and what factors impact its development? How do 
social variables (age, gender, social distance, etc.) relate to language use? Texts from linguistics, literature, film/
music, and news media analyzed to understand impact of linguistic variation on human, personal experience in 
German-speaking world. Taught in German. Instructor: Crane. One course. C-L: Linguistics 358S
390S. Special Topics in German Literature and Culture. FL Focus on aspects of German literature and 
cultural studies. Topics vary. Taught in German. Prerequisites: German 305S or 306S, or equivalent. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Open only to qualified juniors and seniors by consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
420A. Advanced German Cultural Studies. CZ, FL Topics vary. Taught in German and only in the Berlin 
Semester Program. Prerequisite: P.N.d.S. (successful completion of German Language exam administered by 
the Free University). Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
422S. Autonomy and Community: Politics in German Thought and Literature. ALP, CZ, FL How 
modern German thought and literature highlight the importance of community and the problems with 
collectivist ideologies. Enlightenment conceptions of individual autonomy and Romanticist conceptions of 
togetherness; Marxist ideas of classes and Freudian ideas of the mass; Nazi ideology of racial homogeneity and 
contemporary visions of multiculturalism. Instructor: Norberg. One course.
425S. German Underworlds. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL This course will investigate German theories about what 
lies beneath: is it hell or the subterranean foundations that keep our world from collapsing? A product of nature 
or culture? The origin of art or the death of all that is human? And should we go looking for it under mountains, 
or at the center of the modern city? We will take our examples from the German literature, film, and philosophy 
of the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, and we will use them to pose questions about the role of unseen 
depths in the history of German thought. Instructor: Pourciau. One course.
430S. German Literature and Culture. ALP, CCI, FL Principal authors, genres, concepts, and works 
of German literature. Parallel consideration of major developments in German philosophy, music, visual arts. 
Emphasis on the Enlightenment to the present. Instructor: Gellen, Norberg, or Pickford. One course.
435S. German Politics and Society. CCI, CZ, FL Issues and problems of significance in contemporary 
Germany as a changing nation. The political impact of European integration, the cultural impact of immigration, 
and the social impact of a globalized economy. Materials drawn from a wide variety of media and genre: 
newspaper reports, television broadcasts, policy statements, legal documents. Instructor: Norberg. One course.
443S. Captured! Stories of Entrapment in the 20th and 21st Centuries. ALP, FL Stories of self-
seclusion and entrapment, from artist hermits to doomsday preppers. What are the social and psychological 
effects of enclosure, what creative potential does it hold, and why are we so drawn to these narratives? When 
do they lead to escape and liberation, and when do they end in scenes of explosive self-destruction? Stories by 
Franz Kafka, Ilse Aichinger, and Thomas Bernhard; films by Werner Herzog and Michael Haneke; theoretical 
texts by Schopenhauer and Freud; discussions of self-seclusion via social media in the contemporary world. 
Readings and discussions in German. Recommended prerequisite: German 320 or above, or equivalent. 
Instructor: Gellen. One course.
445S. The Uncanny German Canon from Goethe to Kafka. ALP, CCI, FL Investigation of classic 
uncanny German literature from the late eighteenth to early twentieth centuries. Uncanny elements from 
ghosts and Doppelgänger to artificial life persisted across the literary movements of Romanticism, Realism, 



 (GERMAN) 411

and Modernism. The course will explore this literature and also theories of the uncanny including Freud’s 
psychoanalytic approach, Todorov’s structuralist approach, and recent cultural-historical and post-colonial 
approaches. Authors may include: Goethe, Tieck, the Grimms, E.T.A. Hoffmann, Chamisso, Eichendorff, von 
Droste-Hülfshoff, Storm, and Kafka. Prerequisite: German 306 or above or equivalent knowledge of German. 
Instructor: Engelstein. One course.
450S. Ethics and Literature: The Modern German Tradition. ALP, CZ, EI, FL We shall read literary 
texts (short stories, novellas, plays) from the nineteenth and twentieth centuries with the goal of understanding 
how literature might provide—or render problematic—moral insight. How does literature represent and 
question moral psychology and judgment, action, and responsibility? Do literary structures inhabit our moral 
self-understanding, for instance: character, will and choice, and narrative coherence? Taught entirely in 
German. Recommended prerequisite: advanced proficiency (one course beyond 305/306). Instructor: Pickford. 
One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors by consent 
of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
511S. Theory and Practice of Literary Translation. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Literature 640S; 
also C-L: Islamic Studies
690. Special Topics in German Literature and Culture. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
690S. Special Topics in German Literature and Cultural Studies. FL Instructor: Staff. One course.

Courses Taught in English
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics may vary each semester offered and are described in the First-Year 
Seminars booklet. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S-1. Special Topics in German Studies. Introduction to aspects of German culture and civilization. 
Topics vary by semester. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
243. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Italian 220; also C-L: 
Literature 244, English 244, Jewish Studies 243, International Comparative Studies 212
250. Moral Dilemmas in Philosophy and Literature. ALP, CZ, EI An introductory course in moral 
philosophy and literature that first considers moral relativism, moral subjectivism, and moral objectivism before 
studying the three principal theories of ethics current today: consequentialism, deontology, and virtue ethics. 
Each of these approaches to ethics presents intuitively plausible accounts of right moral action that nonetheless 
entail fascinating dilemmas. We investigate some of these dilemmas through reading selected literary works 
alongside the different moral theories. A further question will therefore accompany our investigations: what is 
the relationship(s) between literature and moral philosophy in general? Instructor: Pickford. One course. C-L: 
Literature 250, Study of Ethics 258
261S. The Viking Age. ALP, CCI, EI The history of Viking raiding, trading, exploration, and settlement, with 
attention to the socioeconomic structure, political organization, and naval technology of medieval Scandinavian 
societies. Focus on topics such as Norse mythology, ritual, and runes, Icelandic sagas, gender roles and social 
hierarchies in a warrior society, clan-based justice, and the collision between “heroic” values and the new 
Christian ethic. Taught in English. Instructor: Norberg. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
305S, History 256S
262. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney. ALP, CCI, 
CZ German fairy tales of the Romantic era, including both the “literary fairy tales” by known authors and the 
“folk fairy tales” commonly deemed children’s literature. Comparisons to other fairy tale traditions, notably 
by Perrault and Basile, providing a broader context and perspective. Comparison to the Disney contributions 
elucidating our own preconceptions and prejudices. Special attention to the literary, feminist, and historical 
elements of the fairy tale genre. Taught in English. Instructor: Norberg. One course. C-L: Literature 252, English 
287



  (GERMAN)412

262D. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney. ALP, CCI, 
CZ German fairy tales of the Romantic era, including both the “literary fairy tales” by known authors and the 
“folk fairy tales” commonly deemed children’s literature. Comparisons to other fairy tale traditions, notably 
by Perrault and Basile, providing a broader context and perspective. Comparison to the Disney contributions 
elucidating our own preconceptions and prejudices. Special attention to the literary, feminist, and historical 
elements of the fairy tale genre. Taught in English. Instructor: Norberg or Henry. One course. C-L: English 
287D, Literature 252D
264. German Film. ALP, CZ Introduction to German film, film theory, and reception. Emphasis on history 
and cultural background of films. Topics include Expressionism, Nazi and postwar films, New German cinema, 
DEFA. Films subtitled; readings and discussion in English. Instructor: Gellen. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 280
270. Film Noir. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 282; also C-L: Literature 223
270S. Film Noir. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 282S; also C-L: Literature 
223S
282S. Modernism and the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see English 282S; also C-L: Art History 
281S, Romance Studies 282S, Literature 282S
283S. Istanbul and Berlin. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 383S; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 356S, History 368S
284. Poetics of Murder. ALP, CCI The literature and film of crime and detection in the American, British, 
and German context. An examination of our fascination with stories about violence and death, as well as the 
connections between modern social history and narrative form. Includes interpretations of central works in 
crime fiction history: stories by Poe and Schiller, detective novels by Agatha Christie and Raymond Chandler, 
the thrillers of Fritz Lang, and postmodern tales by Eco, Auster, and Süskind. Taught in English. Instructor: 
Gellen. One course. C-L: Literature 344
286. German History Through Film. ALP, CZ, EI Interdisciplinary seminar at intersection of German 
Studies and History, taught by scholars from both disciplines. Explores ways in which films shape historical 
imaginations and are in themselves artifacts of history. Provides unique opportunity to learn about German past 
and present, and reflect on relationship between film and history. Instructor: Bonker and Gellen. One course. 
C-L: History 255, Visual and Media Studies 287, Literature 286
290-1. Special Topics in German Studies. Aspects of German culture and civilization. Topics vary. Taught 
in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Open only to all students by consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.
320A. Environmental Policy in Europe: Duke in Berlin. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
295A; also C-L: Public Policy 201A, International Comparative Studies
321A. Economics of a United Europe. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 260A; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
322A. Berlin: Architecture, Art and the City, 1871-Present. ALP, CCI, CZ Development of urban 
Berlin from the Gruenderzeit (the Boom Years) of the 1870s to the present: architecture of Imperial Berlin; 
the Weimar and Nazi periods; post World War II; reconstruction as a reunified city. The major architectural 
movements from late historicism to postmodernism. (Taught only in the Duke-in-Berlin Program.) Instructor: 
Neckenig. One course. C-L: Art History 296A, International Comparative Studies
359A. Germany Today: A European Superpower? Duke-in-Berlin. CCI, FL, SS The political, military, 
and economic role of the reunified Germany within the European Union. Analysis of the political system of the 
Federal Republic of Germany and of the structure of the European Union. Taught by German faculty in the 
Duke-in-Berlin spring semester program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 296A, History 
266A, International Comparative Studies



 (GERMAN) 413

360D. What Is Beauty?. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Exploration of Western theories of beauty from Plato to the 
present. What do we mean when we call something beautiful? Does beauty belong to an object or an observer’s 
mind? Is art or nature the best example of beauty? The class also examines the intertwining of modern theories 
of beauty with theories of race; analyzes the gender and power dynamics of theories of beauty; and asks about 
the relationship of aesthetics to society, politics, and biology. Readings include authors such as Plato, Burke, 
G.E. Lessing, Kant, Schiller, Charles Darwin, George Eliot, Nietzsche, W.E.B. DuBois, Arthur Danto, Elaine 
Scarry, Alice Walker, and Semir Zeki. Taught in English. Instructor: Engelstein. One course. C-L: Art History 
360D, Literature 362D, English 362D
362SA. The Economics of the Energiewende in Germany. EI, SS, STS Comprehensive overview of the 
Energiewende—Germany’s effort to reshape its energy system, the industry, and building sectors into a nuclear-
free, low-carbon economy. Application of a range of analytical methods—including economic assessment 
tools, legal analyses and political science—to shed light on different facets of the Energiewende, and to help 
understand the public and academic debates around it. The course thus offers different angles—looking at the 
economics of the Energiewende, as well as the technological, social, ethical, legal and political implications. 
Offered through the Duke-in-Berlin Program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 367SA, 
Economics 331SA
364. Green Germany: World Leader in Environmental Policy. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS Exploration of 
Germany’s leading global role in developing and implementing “green” technologies and environmental policies. 
Analyzes Germany’s current and past policies on energy, agriculture, and pollution control. Examines polices 
in context by studying German ideas about nature, history of German environmentalism, and by looking at 
Green Germany in European and global perspective. Discusses extent ethics can or ought to influence debates 
about global climate change and its ramifications. Readings include scholarly studies, exemplary policies, and 
groundbreaking ecological texts. Instructor: Dolan. One course. C-L: History 250, Environment 366, Energy 364
365A. Art and Architecture of Berlin, Fifteenth to the Twentieth Century. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see Art History 297A
366A. Frontier City Berlin: Facing History’s Great Challenges. CCI, CZ This course deals with some of 
the great challenges and conflicts of the 20th and 21st century, such as capitalism vs. communism; authoritarian 
vs. democratic governance, and focuses on Berlin as a city at the forefront of historic struggles. In particular, 
it treats Berlin as the site of the first socialist revolution in a highly industrialized nation (1918/19); the rise of 
fascism amidst an advanced urban culture, the legacy of world war and totalitarian rule; the Cold War division 
of Berlin; the fall of communism and the crises of capitalism; and the search for an environmentally sustainable 
future. Offered in English in the Duke-in-Berlin summer program. Instructor: Philipsen, Norberg. One course. 
C-L: Public Policy 210A, History 334A, Political Science 260A
367A. Jewish Berlin. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Overview of German Jewish history and culture, sampling 
documents, literature, and art from the Enlightenment to the present day. Excursions to Berlin sites, including 
the Berlin Jewish Museum, Sachsenhausen concentration camp, and the Grünewald Deportation Memorial. 
Meetings with Jewish cultural leaders and attendance at a service at one of the Berlin synagogues. Taught in 
English only in the Duke Summer in Berlin program. Instructor: Gellen and Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish 
Studies 367A, Literature 367A, International Comparative Studies
368. German Jewish Culture from the Enlightenment to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ Key texts 
(literary, philosophical, and political) from the Enlightenment (18th cent.); periods of emancipation and 
assimilation, and rising political anti-Semitism (19th cent.); as well as Weimar, Nazi, and postwar periods 
(20th cent). Authors include Moses Mendelssohn, Lessing, Franzos, Droste-Hülshoff, Marx, Schnitzler, as well 
as contemporaries such as Korn, Broder, and Biller. Taught in English. Instructor: Gellen. One course. C-L: 
Literature 368, Jewish Studies 368, Religion 343
370. The Devil’s Pact: Faust and the Faust Tradition. ALP, CCI, EI Selling souls to the Devil, from 
England’s Christopher Marlowe to Germany’s Goethe and beyond. Wrestling with the problem of evil, and 
getting past it, to the problems of knowledge, experience, and redemption, exploring why the Faust story 
keeps on being retold. Readings and discussion in English. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 345, Literature 240, Ethics Elective
372. Kafka and Cinema. ALP, CCI, STS Explores the link between Franz Kafka, the great modernist 
author, and cinema, the most significant modern technological art form. Social and cultural context (multi-



  (GERMAN)414

lingual and multi-ethnic Prague); Kafka’s complex personal identity (German-speaker, Jew, patient, life-long 
bachelor); writing cinematically; Kafka’s influence on twentieth- and twenty-first-century film, especially 
existentialism and the “kafkaesque”; translating between media/platforms as a concern of high modernism 
and our contemporary technological landscape. Includes works by Franz Kafka, Fritz Lang, Orson Welles, 
Steven Soderbergh, Jonathan Lethem, and the Coen Brothers. Taught entirely in English, no prerequisites. 
Evening meeting time is for film screenings. Instructor: Gellen. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 371, 
Literature 377, Jewish Studies 372
376SA. Berlin Film City: Movies in the Metropolis. ALP, CCI A course about Berlin’s rich and 
unparalleled cinema history. Screenings, readings, and visits to historical studios and cinemas, film museums, 
archives, and film academies. The course is structured around a series of iconic films about Berlin. Units on 
Weimar cinema, Nazi film, DEFA (East Germany’s production studio), the New German Cinema of the 1970s 
and 80s, post-wall film, and the twenty-first century Berlin School. Students will engage in close analysis of films 
in their historical context and discuss how cinema engages with issues of national, political, religious, ethnic, 
gender and sexual identities. Offered in English in the Duke in Berlin summer program. Instructor: Gellen. One 
course. C-L: History 268SA, Visual and Media Studies 376SA
380. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, SS A critical examination and assessment of the thought of Marx, 
Nietzsche, and Freud: revolutionary theory and practice; nihilism and the challenge of overcoming it; the hidden 
foundations of the self and of culture. Instructor: Pickford. One course. C-L: Philosophy 286, Literature 280, 
Political Science 378, Marxism and Society
380D. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Three principle sources of the twentieth (and now twenty-
first) century: the insistence on an ultimate convergence of (revolutionary) theory and practice; the phenomenon 
of nihilism and the challenge of overcoming it; the exploration of the hidden foundations of the self and of 
culture. A critical examination and assessment of the thought of Marx, Nietzsche, and Freud. Instructor: 
Pickford. One course. C-L: Philosophy 286D, Literature 280D, Political Science 378D
386. Existentialist Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS Distinctively cinematic engagements with principal 
themes in the existentialist tradition: isolation and alienation, identity and commitment, perception and reality, 
communication and contact, madness and sanity. In-depth exploration of culturally specific filmic modes 
of capturing, processing, and transmitting images of human life and the myriad issues, moral conflicts, and 
dilemmas that inform it. Films to be considered will vary with different offerings of the course, but may include 
works of directors such as Herzog, Schlöndorff, Fassbinder, Wenders, Bergman, Antonioni, Kurosawa, and 
Godard, among others. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 372, Literature 218, Visual and Media 
Studies 283
387. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI The ways in which official 
German culture comes to terms with its Nazi past. Background reading in history and politics; primary focus 
on films, dramas, novels, and poetry, as well as public memorials, monuments, and museums. Authors treated 
include: Wolfgang Borchert, Rolf Hochhuth, Peter Weiss, Ruth Klüger. Taught in English. Instructor: Dolan. 
One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 369, Literature 369, History 261, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 387, Human Rights, International Comparative Studies
390-1. Special Topics in German Studies. Aspects of German culture and civilization. Topics vary. Taught 
in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in German Studies. Aspects of German culture and civilization. Topics vary. 
Taught in English.Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SA. Special Topics in German Literature and Culture. Focus on aspects of German literature and 
cultural studies. Topics vary. Offered only in the Duke-in-Berlin programs. Instructor: Staff. One course.
460S. World War I and the History of Art & Architecture: Germany and Beyond. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 460S; also C-L: History 452S
490S. Special Topics in German Studies. Aspects of German culture and civilization. Topics vary. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
501. German for Academic Research I. Introduction to German for the purpose of developing reading 
and translation skills necessary for pursuing academic research. Assumes no prior knowledge of German. 



 (GERMAN) 415

Foundations of German grammar and syntax; emphasis on vocabulary and translations. Selected readings 
in theory of translation and techniques. Not open for credit to undergraduate students who have taken 
Intermediate German (203, 204, 212, or equivalent). Does not count toward the major or minor, or toward the 
fulfillment of the Foreign Language Requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
502. German for Academic Research II. Development and refinement of skills needed to read and 
translate intermediate to advanced academic German. Texts selected by instructor, with regular opportunities 
to work on materials related to individual fields/research topics. Selected readings in theory of translation 
and techniques. Prerequisite: German 501. Not open for credit to undergraduate students who have taken 
Intermediate German (203, 204, 212, or equivalent). Does not count toward the major or minor, or toward the 
fulfillment of the Foreign Language Requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
510S. Old Norse: Introduction to the Language of Viking Scandinavia. ALP, CZ Introduction to 
the language of Viking Scandinavia, with primary goal of providing students with the linguistic tools needed 
to read the fascinating Norse literature in the original. Systematic presentation of grammar of Old Norse, and 
development of knowledge and skills needed to read and translate a considerable variety of Norse prose and, 
to a lesser degree, poetic texts. Also examines the relationship of Old Norse to other Germanic languages, as 
well as aspects of ancient Scandinavian culture and history. No previous knowledge of linguistics is expected or 
assumed. Knowledge of German is moderately helpful but not necessary. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Linguistics 562S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 609S
512S. Theories of the Image: The Image in Walter Benjamin. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 
612S; also C-L: Romance Studies 612S, Visual and Media Studies 612S
532S. Fin-de-siècle and Interwar Vienna: Politics, Society, and Culture. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. 
C-L: see History 532S
535S. Comparative Modernisms. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 532S; also C-L: Literature 532S
560. History of the German Language. Phonology, morphology, and syntax of German from the 
beginnings to the present. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 607, Linguistics 
560
561S. Second Language Acquisition and Applied Linguistics. SS Introduction to the fields of second 
language acquisition and applied linguistics. Investigation of competing theories of language acquisition and 
learning, and various aspects of applied linguistics, including language and cognition, language and power, 
bilingualism, language and identity, and intercultural communication. Taught in English. Instructor: Crane. One 
course. C-L: Linguistics 561S
565S. Art and the Holocaust: Architecture, Art, and Cultural Politics during the Nazi Period. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 525S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 555S, History 
531S
570. Frankfurt School Critical Theory. CZ, EI This course serves as an introduction to the “Frankfurt 
School” and Critical Theory with particular emphasis upon rationality, social psychology, and aesthetics. 
Through close readings of key texts by members of the school (Horkheimer, Benjamin, Adorno, Habermas) we 
will work toward an understanding of the analyses they developed and consider their validity. All readings and 
discussions are in English. Instructor: Pickford. One course. C-L: Philosophy 572, Political Science 570
575S. Hegel’s Political Philosophy. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 676S; also C-L: 
Philosophy 536S
576S. Nietzsche’s Political Philosophy. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 577S; also C-L: 
Philosophy 537S
580S. Music in Literature and Philosophy. ALP, CCI, R Readings in the philosophy of nineteenth- and 
early twentieth-century “classical” music and in literature as a source for and response to musical composition, 
performance, and listening experience. Taught in English. Instructor: Pfau. One course. C-L: English 580S, 
International Comparative Studies 527S
586S. Literary Guide to Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 586S; also C-L: Literature 542S
590S. Special Topics in German Studies. Special topics in German literature and cultural studies. Taught 
in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.



  (GERMAN)416

The Major
Students majoring in German develop language skills, become knowledgeable about the literature 

and culture of German-speaking areas, and acquire analytic and interpretive abilities. The combination of 
language skills with the ability to navigate across cultures is excellent preparation for a variety of professions in 
business, government, engineering, law, education, and academia. Double (second) majors are also encouraged 
and supported. Numerous opportunities are available, including Global Education programs, interdepartmental 
majors, Fulbright and German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) scholarships, independent research and 
independent studies, and internships, both before and after graduation. Students interested in a major should 
consult the director of undergraduate studies.

Requirements. Ten one-credit departmental courses at the 200 level or above, including cross-listed 
courses and courses taught in the Duke-in-Berlin program. Direct enrollment classes taken in the Duke-in-Berlin 
program count as well. Half-credit courses may count toward the total number of credits required for graduation, 
however, they do not count toward the major. Eight out of ten of these courses must be taught in German; 
exceptions to this rule can be made at the discretion of the director of undergraduate studies.

Required courses include the Advanced German sequence, German 305S and/or 306S (and/or the 
equivalent taught in Berlin, German 303AS, German 312AS, or German 319AS), at least two courses taught in 
German on Duke’s home campus numbered 320 or above, at least one of which must be a 400-level course.

The Minor
Requirements. Five one-credit departmental courses taught at the 200 level or above, including cross-

listed courses and courses taught in the Duke-in-Berlin program. Direct enrollment classes taken in the Duke-in-
Berlin program count as well. Four out of five of these courses must be taught in German.

Note: All Duke-in-Berlin courses taught in German at the 200 level or above, semester and summer, may 
count toward the major and minor as courses taught in German. Half-credit courses may count toward the total 
number of credits required for graduation; however, they do not count toward the minor.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Qualified students (see the section on honors in this bulletin) may apply or be invited to apply for Graduation 

with Distinction. The application deadline is preregistration for the fall semester of the senior year. Further 
information may be obtained from the director of undergraduate studies.

Global Development Engineering 
A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.

Global development engineering is focused on specific knowledge and skills related to planning, design, 
construction and operation of engineered systems in under resourced settings using appropriate technology to 
address issues of social justice and leveraging technological advances to benefit all of humanity, but especially 
marginalized populations. Duke’s certificate in global development engineering seeks to prepare engineers and 
other international development professionals for careers in the field of sustainable international development 
partnering with marginalized or disadvantaged people groups to address both technical and more structural 
issues related to poverty, wealth inequality, health access, and economic empowerment. The curricular pathway 
through the certificate includes the following: a) an Introductory/Gateway Class (which must be completed no 
later than the fall of a student’s junior year), b) demonstrated Global Competency (three classes total, with one 
class from Language and Culture; one from Ethics; and one from Economics OR Policy), c) Technological Depth 
(two course from one of the following tracks: Water, Energy, or Appropriate Technology), d) Required Experiential 
Component (putting education into practice), e) Design and Implementation Capstone. The total requirement is 
seven curricular courses plus one experiential/internship experience. See https://cee.duke.edu/undergraduate/
certificates/global-development-engineering-certificate.

https://cee.duke.edu/undergraduate/certificates/global-development-engineering-certificate
https://cee.duke.edu/undergraduate/certificates/global-development-engineering-certificate


Global Health (GLHLTH) 417

Global Health
Professor Clements, Director of Undergraduate Studies

A second major and a minor are available in this program. 
Global health is an area of study, research, and practice that emphasizes achieving health equity for all 

people worldwide. Global health involves myriad disciplines, incorporates population-based approaches and 
individual level clinical care, promotes interdisciplinary collaboration, and emphasizes transnational health issues 
and determinants. The Program in Global Health incorporates knowledge from academic disciplines—within the 
sciences, social sciences and humanities—to best address the complexity of global health challenges.

Courses in Global Health (GLHLTH)
89S. First Year Seminar: Special Topics in Global Health. Topics vary depending on semester and 
section. Topics may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, 
and global health policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Fundamentals of Global Health. CCI, EI, SS, STS Introduction to global health issues and 
challenges. Develop an understanding of key concepts, tools, and frameworks essential for continued study in 
global health. Focus on global disease burden, health determinants and disparities, health policy and actors, 
and challenges of global health interventions. Explore the importance of understanding and addressing global 
health through multidisciplinary frameworks of the natural sciences, social-behavioral sciences, humanities, and 
policy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101D. Fundamentals of Global Health. CCI, EI, SS, STS Introduction to global health issues and 
challenges. Develop an understanding of key concepts, tools, and frameworks essential for continued study in 
global health. Focus on global disease burden, health determinants and disparities, health policy and actors, 
and challenges of global health interventions. Explore the importance of understanding and addressing global 
health through multidisciplinary frameworks of the natural sciences, social-behavioral sciences, humanities, and 
policy. Consists of lecture and learning labs, intensive small group discussion, and global health case analyses. 
Intended for undergraduates. Instructor: Staff. One course.
140FS. On Suffering: How Science and Stories Shape Us. ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
140FS; also C-L: Science & Society 140FS, Sociology 140FS
142. History of Chinese Medicine. CCI, CZ, STS, W One course. C-L: see History 239; also C-L: Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 142
153. Climate, Coffee, and Coronavirus: Why Ecology Matters to Human Health. EI, NS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Biology 153; also C-L: Environment 153
154. AIDS and Other Emerging Diseases. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 154; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 103, Global Health
174. Introduction to the History of Medicine. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see History 113
187FS. Effectively Addressing Modern Pandemics of Disease: What Did We Do Wrong to Get 
So Sick?. NS, STS This course will explore Western disease and its root causes. At the same time, students 
will investigate what modern medicine has done to address the issues, and will discuss the effectiveness and 
magnitude of that effort. For each case study, students will determine what might have gone wrong, how 
could it have been done differently, and what forces might be at play that have prevented effective action. 
The pharmaceutical paradigm that currently governs both modern medicine and biomedical research will be 
carefully examined. Students will be encouraged to envision and critically examine potential alternatives. Open 
only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Parker. One course.
188FS. A Global Perspective on Provider-Patient Communication. CCI, SS Explores the differing 
perspectives of patients and their health care providers; considers the role of implicit bias in the evolution 
of disparities in health care quality for racial and ethnic minorities; investigates the problem of health care 
communication across cultures; examines the ways in which charitable foundations in the United States and 
Europe might impose a Western model of health care communication on communities in developing countries; 
considers creative approaches to creating trust and effective communication between patients and the systems 
which provide health care. Intended only for focus students in global health cluster. Instructor: Prose. One 
course.



 Global Health (GLHLTH)418

189FS. To Boldly Go! Global Health and the American Way of Engagement. CCI, CZ, EI, 
STS Course examines assumptions and language of Global Health in the US and ethical challenges of cross-
cultural engagement. Title comes from Roddenberry’s Star Trek (1966); course uses the series to think about 
technology, exploration, and encounter. We will use texts that examine how culture and power in the US have 
framed interactions with and control of people inside the US and in other countries, from people carrying 
contagious disease to women whose bodies represent a threat to a proposed social order. Students will analyze 
historical documents and images from popular culture and write close analyses identifying the underlying 
ethical and cultural frameworks in these documents. Instructor: Hall. One course. C-L: Science & Society 189FS
190FS. Special Topics in Focus. Focus course. Topics vary depending on semester and section. Topics may 
include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, global health policies, 
and interdisciplinary global health topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Global Health. Content to be determined each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 196FS; also C-L: African & African American Studies 196FS, Psychology 196FS, Public Policy 
196FS, Sociology 196FS, Cultural Anthropology 196FS, Science & Society
201FS. Confronting Global Health Challenges: What Would You Do?. CCI, SS, STS Saving lives 
and improving health requires wise decision-making by local, national, and international health leaders and 
communities: policies, strategies, programs at the heart of success. This course will engage students in political, 
economic, cultural, psychosocial, human rights, equity considerations in five key areas of global health: 
universal healthcare, women’s health, global pandemics, product-driven epidemics, and global warming health 
impacts. Students’ critical analysis and decision-making skills will be developed though active learning teaching 
cases, role plays, debates, and simulations from actual situations faced by health leaders at all levels. Open only 
to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Quick. One course.
203. History of Global Health. CCI, CZ, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 203
205. Health and Healing in Africa. CCI, CZ, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 205
208. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 208, History 249, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 369
208S. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 208S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 369S, History 249S
210. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict. EI, SS The primary foci of this course are: 
the ethics of engagement with marginalized/stigmatized populations; understanding the influence of power 
dynamics; and understanding the ways in which policies create structures that limit abilities. Students explore 
the roots of their personal value systems and those of others, in an effort to understand causes of conflict and 
ethical missteps in global health engagement. Involves reading texts and coming to class ready to engage in 
conversations and activities related to the learning objectives. Weekly 5-question quizzes help to ensure that 
students come to class prepared to engage with the material. Instructor: Whetten or Moe. One course. C-L: 
Public Policy 330, International Comparative Studies 397, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 330, Human Rights
212. Gender and Global Health. SS Examines interconnections among gender, poverty, and health. Adopts 
global perspective with focus on resource poor countries. Discusses frameworks for understanding health as 
well as in depth case studies of particular health areas. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Sociology 212, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 212, Human Rights
215. Case Studies in Global Sexual and Reproductive Health. CCI, SS, STS, W Through the 
examination of weekly case studies, students will explore the complexity of working in the field of global sexual 
and reproductive health and the ways in which various health and social science disciplines can be integrated 
in the development of effective health programs. Session topics will include family planning, maternity care, 
gender-based violence, abortion, and HIV/AIDS. Using examples from the US and low-and middle-income 



Global Health (GLHLTH) 419

countries, students will identify key focus areas in sexual and reproductive health, technical and programmatic 
challenges and successful interventions. Recommended prerequisite: Global Health 212. Instructor: Huchko. 
One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 220
216S. Performing Sexual Health: The Duke Sex Ed Squad. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Dance 215S; 
also C-L: Theater Studies 279S
220S. Anthropology and Global Health. EI, SS, STS Investigates connections between anthropology 
and global health. Readings based on ethnographic research conducted globally. Topics include cross-cultural 
experiences of epidemics, ethical implications of globalizing clinical trials, moral and political dimensions of 
health and humanitarian interventions, connections between nationalism and population policy, overlaps 
between traditional healing systems and public health programs, how gender ideologies shape reproductive 
health, and questions of identity, power, and ethics amidst global rollout of HIV therapies. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 218S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 220S, Human 
Rights
225. Food, Farming, and Feminism. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 275; also C-L: Environment 209, History 221
230L. Global Women’s Health Technologies. STS One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 230L
235. Drugs, Chemicals, and Health: Histories of Substances in Economies, Environments, and 
Bodies. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 235; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 
237
241. Global Bioethics. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 281; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 282
248S. Ethical Dimensions of Environmental Policy. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
288S
257. From Madness to Mental Disorders: Sociology of Mental Health. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Sociology 257
258D. Race, Genomics, and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 261D; also C-L: Science & Society 258D, Cultural Anthropology 261D, Biology 261D, Visual and Media 
Studies 274D
261. The Psychology of Health Behavior Change. SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 211; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 211
270T-1. Voices in Global Health: Arabic Tutorial. Through practical and theoretical discussions around 
case studies, personal narratives, documentaries and recorded interviews in the Arabic language, students 
examine how language and culture impact health beliefs and behaviors. Explore underlying reasons for different 
beliefs and behaviors with the goal of creating culturally appropriate interventions. Meet weekly for 75 minutes. 
Prerequisite: Arabic 305 or equivalent. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 270T-1
270T-3. Voices in Global Health: French Tutorial. Through practical and theoretical discussions around 
case studies, personal narratives, documentaries and recorded interviews in the French language, students will 
examine how language and culture impact health beliefs and behaviors. Explore underlying reasons for different 
beliefs and behaviors with the goal of creating culturally appropriate interventions. Tutorials meet weekly for 
75 minutes. Prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent or concurrent enrollment in French 204. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: French 270T-3
270T-4. Voices in Global Health: Hindi Tutorial. Explores underlying reasons for different beliefs and 
behaviors with the goal of creating culturally appropriate interventions. Through practical and theoretical 
discussions around case studies, personal narratives, documentaries and interviews, students examine how 
language and culture impact health beliefs and behaviors. Meets weekly for 75 minutes. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 270T-4, Hindi 270T-4
270T-5. Voices in Global Health: Mandarin Tutorial. Through practical and theoretical discussions 
around case studies, personal narratives, documentaries and recorded interviews in the Chinese language, 



 Global Health (GLHLTH)420

students examine how language and culture impact health beliefs and behaviors. Explore underlying reasons 
for different beliefs and behaviors with the goal of creating culturally appropriate interventions. Meet weekly for 
75 minutes. Prerequisite: Chinese 305 or equivalent. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course. 
C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 270T-5
270T-6. Voices in Global Health: Spanish Tutorial. Through practical and theoretical discussions around 
case studies, personal narratives, documentaries and recorded interviews in the Spanish language, students will 
examine how language and culture impact health beliefs and behaviors. Explore underlying reasons for different 
beliefs and behaviors with the goal of creating culturally appropriate interventions. Tutorials meet weekly for 75 
minutes. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent or concurrent enrollment in Spanish 204. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Spanish 270T-1
270T-7. Voices in Global Health: Swahili Tutorial. Through practical and theoretical discussions around 
case studies, personal narratives, documentaries and recorded interviews in the Swahili language, students 
examine how language and culture impact health beliefs and behaviors. Explore underlying reasons for different 
beliefs and behaviors with the goal of creating culturally appropriate interventions. Meet weekly for 75 minutes. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
273S. Entrepreneurial Problem Solving in Global Health. SS One course. C-L: see Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 263S
275S. Leadership and the Changing Landscape of Health Care. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 275S
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 277S; also C-L: Public Policy 274S, Russian 277S, Study of Ethics 277S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 277S, Human Rights
290S. Special Topics in Global Health. Content to be determined each semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
302. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS. ALP, CCI, SS How do we learn about the global 
experience of people living with HIV/AIDS? Read biographies, narratives, poetry, and blogs written by HIV+ 
persons, their families, friends, doctors, and caregivers. Listen to stories told in film documentaries and on the 
internet. Study interdisciplinary theories of identity and sexuality, illness narratives, narrative medicine, and 
doctor-patient communication. Reflect on the different meanings of the AIDS experience for men and women, 
young and old, in Brazil, Botswana, China, Haiti, Russia, South Africa, and rural and urban USA. Apply this 
new framework to investigate and analyze HIV/AIDS programs. Prior global health coursework recommended. 
Instructor: Stewart. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 295, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 302, Human Rights, Science & Society
303. Global Health Systems. CCI, SS, STS Introduces global health systems in three modules--
Globalization, Health, and Systems--then draws these three topics together to situate the concept and practice 
of “global health” within the contemporary context of health systems in various countries around the world. 
Emphasizes systems theory and systems thinking, drawing on a wide a range of disciplines. Instructor: Toole. 
One course.
304. Human Health in Evolutionary Perspective. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary 
Anthropology 285
305. Global Health: Social Determinants. SS, STS This course will introduce students to the major social 
factors that affect public health. We will cover a wide range of topics from the health impact of global income 
inequality, gender, access to education, to the role of specific work place policies, among other topics. Each 
lecture will introduce a social variable (such as race or gender), discuss its theoretical underpinnings, and then 
link it to the current empirical evidence to health outcomes. The strengths and weaknesses of the empirical 
evidence will be discussed. Implications for intervention strategies and policy implications will be discussed with 
a focus on applicability to lower and middle income country settings. Instructor: Staff. One course.
306. Global Health Policy: Transforming Evidence into Action. EI, SS, STS In-depth examination 
of how to close the gap between evidence and practical policy making as a way to improve global health. How 
global health policies are shaped; identifying key actors and their power; understanding/influencing the 



Global Health (GLHLTH) 421

processes that drive large scale change in global health; exploring ways in which health issues reach the top of 
the agenda; analyzing how decisions are made by policy makers; implementing policies from the “top down” 
and “bottom up.” The interplay between the different worlds of research and policy. Practical tools for becoming 
a policy broker, skilled in transforming evidence to action. Real world case studies. Case-based competition. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 324
308A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health. CCI, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 
308A; also C-L: Biology 308A
309A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 309A; 
also C-L: Biology 309A, Marine Sciences
310S. Governance and Healthcare Innovation. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 250S
312. War and Public Health in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 312; also C-L: Public Policy 333, Cultural Anthropology 312, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 312, Human Rights
315D. Primate Disease Ecology and Global Health. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary 
Anthropology 385D
315S. Primate Disease Ecology and Global Health. NS, R, STS, W One course. C-L: see Evolutionary 
Anthropology 385S
320. Planetary Health: Ecosystems, Human Health and Policy. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 320
321-1. Medical Anthropology. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 424-1; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 424-1
323. Trauma and Global Mental Health in Haiti. ALP, CCI, CZ Haiti as a case study in global mental 
health approaches to traumatic stress. Explores the genesis of the diagnostic rubric of posttraumatic stress 
disorder (PTSD) and its relationship to local cultural contexts. Assesses critical and globalized approaches 
to adversity and shock reactions, with an emphasis on pioneering multi-site critical methodologies. Explores 
how global mental health practices have been analyzed and applied to Haiti by Haitian and non-Haitian 
practitioners. Fiction and prose by Edwidge Danticat will serve to bring historical and contemporary risks, 
ramifications, and co-morbidities of traumatic stress in Haiti into focus. Instructor: Jenson. One course. C-L: 
Romance Studies 220
325S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones. CCI, CZ, EI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 
325S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 332S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
325S, Human Rights
326. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 306; also C-L: 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 306, Cultural Anthropology 306, Human Rights
326A. Language, Culture, and Health in Costa Rica. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 306A
335. Economics of Global Health. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Economics 335
340. Social Determinants of US Health Disparities. SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 361; also C-L: 
Human Rights
341. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control. CCI, EI, SS Examination of the role of ethical 
decision-making when controlling infectious disease epidemics. Applies classic public health ethics of balancing 
individual liberty vs. public good to the new global health context of emerging infectious diseases such as HIV/
AIDS, Ebola, and SARS, plus re-emerging infectious diseases such as multidrug-resistant TB, polio, and cholera. 
Explores questions of resource allocation, mandatory or voluntary prevention measures, and ethical obligations 
of health care workers vs. responsibilities of individuals in the context of new global public health. Prior global 
health coursework recommended. Instructor: Stewart. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 299, 
Science & Society 341, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 341, Human Rights
345. Global Health as an Ethical Enterprise. CZ, EI, SS Introduces the challenges of living an ethical 
life when conceived as an expression of compassion for distant strangers. Considers the organization of 
compassion into the multi-billion dollar political-economic enterprise of global health. Explores tensions 



 Global Health (GLHLTH)422

between global health as an ethical enterprise and the political-economic realities of the high-income countries 
and multinational organizations that fund global health and support a vast development industry populated 
by thousands of non-governmental organizations, pharmaceutical and chemical corporations, and countless 
organizations dedicated to the advancement of medicine and health science. Fulfills global health ethics 
requirement. Instructor: Toole. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 344
353. Life and Death: Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
341; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 353, Sociology 351
362. Understanding the Causes and Spread of Human Disease: Global Health Epidemiology. QS, 
SS, STS How do we identify the causes and spread of diseases, such as Novel Coronavirus 2019 or Ebola? How 
do we estimate the effects of poverty, genetics, and other factors, on the risk of non-communicable diseases? 
Students will learn how to answer these questions, and others, using concepts and methods from the field of 
epidemiology. Each week we will tackle a distinct global health problem by reading relevant scientific articles. 
We will then learn methods to study these global health issues, including how to design observational and 
experimental studies to identify disease risk factors. A prior quantitative course is not required; however, an 
interest in empirical data analysis is recommended. Instructor: Egger. One course.
363. Fundamentals of Global Mental Health. R, SS Examines global mental health from perspectives of 
culture, public health, epidemiology, human rights, policy, and intervention. Readings focus on peer-reviewed 
research literature highlighting topics such as the prevalence of mental health disorders worldwide, the role 
of culture in mental health, and the interventions backed by strong evidence for prevention and treatment. 
Students will discuss and critique study methodologies and explore the needs for future research in this 
emerging field. Designed for students with prior research methods and psychology coursework. Instructor: 
Puffer. One course. C-L: Psychology 323, Cultural Anthropology 323
371. Research Methods in Global Health. R, SS Introduction to research methods through examination 
of a variety of methodological techniques in behavioral and social sciences and relevant to multidisciplinary GH 
research. Problem-based approach to practice identifying GH questions of interest, ways to operationalize and 
test them, including strengths and weaknesses of different approaches. Focus on discussing current GH issues, 
exploring questions and solutions, reading and evaluating published research and interpreting results. Skills 
include identification of global health problems, awareness of contextual, behavioral, and ethical issues involved, 
conceptualization of research questions, and designing a research study. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Psychology 309
373. Global Health Ethics in Research. EI, SS Introduces ethical and human rights concepts in Global 
Health and current issues in health ethics. Explores how to understand and engage in ethical health service, 
intervention, research and education. Requires students analyze and critique ethical choices of individuals, 
policy-makers and health workers. Explores standards of care, access to care, best outcomes vs. distributed 
justice. Focuses on ethics related to infectious diseases; obesity, alcohol and tobacco; and environmental health. 
Instructor: Ariely. One course.
383SA. Global Health in Context: Sri Lanka. CCI, SS, STS A study abroad course based in Galle, Sri 
Lanka, this program combines students and instructors from three universities: Duke; Academic Medical 
Centre, University of Amsterdam; University of Ruhuna, Sri Lanka. Students engage on problems and solutions 
related to health and health disparities in a global context through study of health systems, burden of disease 
and epidemiological studies. Classroom studies and teamwork will be combined with academic excursions in 
Sri Lanka to learn from local public health experts, practitioners, community members and leaders. Analysis of 
readings on Maternal/Child Health, Emerging Infectious Diseases, Health of Vulnerable Workers, and Aging. 
Department consent required. Prerequisite: Global Health 101. Instructor: Ostbye. One course.
390. Special Topics in Global Health Studies. Topics vary depending on semester and section. Topics 
may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, and global health 
policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Global Health. Topics vary depending on 
semester and section. Topics may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs 
assessment, and global health policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390L. Special Topics with Lab in Global Health Studies. Topics vary depending on semester and 



Global Health (GLHLTH) 423

section. Topics may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, 
and global health policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390L-1. Special Topics with Lab in Global Health Studies. Topics vary depending on semester and 
section. Topics may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, 
and global health policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Global Health Studies. Topics vary depending on semester and section. Topics 
may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, and global health 
policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study in Global Health. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special 
interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a significant 
academic product. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors by consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies in global health. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-1. Independent Study in Global Health. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special 
interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic 
product. Open only to qualified students by consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies in global 
health. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
391-2. Independent Study in Global Health. Individual non-research directed study in field of special 
interest on previously approved topic, under supervision of faculty member, resulting in an academic product. 
Open only to qualified students by consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies in global health. 
Half-course, S/U grading basis. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
392. Student Research Training in Global Health. The DGHI Student Research Training Program is 
an intensive experiential learning program that engages second and third year undergraduate students in the 
development, implementation and assessment of a community-based project. Students will work in Honduras, 
India, Kenya, and North Carolina, US on issues ranging from infant mortality to health care mapping to access 
to care for migrant populations and HIV/AIDS and substance abuse issues. Students will work directly with a 
faculty director and a community partner. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study in Global Health. R Individual research-oriented directed study in a 
field of special interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a 
significant academic product. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors by consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies in global health. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393-1. Research Independent Study in Global Health. R Individual research-oriented directed study in a 
field of special interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a 
significant academic product. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors by consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies in global health. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
395. Connections in Global Health: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate 
and graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to 
pressing global health issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting global health fellows, and 
other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to an on-going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other 
learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant 
analysis and interpretation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395-1. Connections in Global Health: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate 
and graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to 
pressing global health issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting global health fellows, and 
other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to an on-going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other 
learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires substantive paper or product containing significant 
analysis and interpretation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
396. Connections in Global Health: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate 
and graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to 



 Global Health (GLHLTH)424

pressing global health issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting global health fellows, and 
other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to an on-going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other 
learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires final paper or product containing significant analysis and 
interpretation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
396-1. Connections in Global Health: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate 
and graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to 
pressing global health issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting global health fellows, and 
other experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to an on-going research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other 
learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires final paper or product containing significant analysis and 
interpretation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
460S. Capstone Seminar: The Black Death and Medieval Society. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see History 460S; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 429S
481. Living, Dying, Healing in Russia. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 481; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 481
495S. Graduation with Distinction in Global Health Thesis Preparation Couse. Accompanies the 
writing of a research-focused thesis in Global Health. Covers advanced research design, manuscript writing, 
interpretation of results, and oral presentation. Provides information on the thesis writing process and provides 
feedback on student projects. Students are expected to work closely with their faculty mentor on their project. 
Restricted to students enrolled concurrently in a research independent study and seeking Graduate with 
Distinction. May be open to Program II students whose thesis topic is directly related to global health and with 
permission of the instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S-1. Graduation with Distinction in Global Health Thesis Preparation Course. Accompanies 
the writing of a research-focused thesis in Global Health. Provides information on the thesis writing process 
and feedback on student projects. Covers basics of research design (identifying appropriate research questions 
and related analyses), interpretation of results, writing skills and strategies, and oral presentation. Students are 
expected to work closely with their faculty mentor on their project. Restricted to students enrolled concurrently 
in a research independent study and seeking Graduate with Distinction. May be open to Program II students 
if thesis topic is directly related to global health and with permission of the instructor. Department consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
496S. Graduation with Distinction in Global Health 2. Accompanies the writing of a research-
focused thesis in Global Health. Provides information on the thesis writing process and feedback on student 
projects. Covers basics of research design (identifying appropriate research questions and related analyses), 
interpretation of results, writing skills and strategies, and oral presentation. Students are expected to work 
closely with their faculty mentor on their project. Restricted to students enrolled concurrently in a research 
independent study and seeking Graduate with Distinction. May be open to Program II students if thesis topic 
is directly related to global health and with permission of the instructor. Departmental consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
499. Global Health Capstone. R, SS Capstone Course for students in Global Health Major. Group analysis 
of a current global health problem/issue. Project involves background research, data acquisition, analysis, 
writing, and presentation of a substantial research paper/report at an advanced level. Consent of program 
director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
531. Cost-Benefit Analysis for Health and Environmental Policy. R, SS Course considers the 
importance of economic analysis, or cost-benefit analysis (CBA), for public policy assessments. Specific 
focus is on health and environmental policy, and the steps in identification / cataloguing, quantification, 
and monetization of impacts of potential policies and projects. Covers: Economic rationale for CBA; Basic 
principles for assessing the economic effects of projects; Techniques for valuing health and environmental 
impacts; Intergenerational/philosophical concerns related to CBA; Social discounting; Risk and uncertainty; 
Comparisons of CBA with other approaches (i.e. cost effectiveness analysis, multi-objective analysis). Instructor: 
Jeuland. One course. C-L: Public Policy 607, Environment 563



Global Health (GLHLTH) 425

533S. Water Cooperation and Conflict. R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 580S; also C-L: 
Environment 543S, International Comparative Studies 580S
534. Water Quality Health. One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 524; also C-L: Environment 524, 
Energy 524
538. Global Environmental Health: Economics and Policy. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 
582; also C-L: Environment 538
540. Global Health Ethics: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. EI, SS Same as Global Health 210 but 
requires an additional paper; not open to students who have taken Global Health 210. Department consent 
required. Instructor: Whetten. One course. C-L: Public Policy 638
541S. Organized Compassion: History and Ethics of Humanitarianism. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Study of Ethics 560S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 560S, Human Rights
548S. Global History of Medicine. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 548S; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 584S
549S. Histories of Science and Technology. CCI, CZ, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 549S; also 
C-L: Science & Society 549S, Energy and the Environment
550. Topics in Population, Health, and Policy. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 633; also C-L: 
Sociology 534
560. Program Management and Research Administration in Global Health. SS Using case examples 
of international health delivery interventions and research programs, this course examines the historical, 
social, and political effects on the application of program management and research administration skills 
which include: accounting/finance/budget, project management, operations and performance management, 
organizational relationships and structure, interpersonal and group interactions, communications (oral, writing; 
social and digital media), monitoring and evaluation, business and applied research ethics. Instructor: Moe. One 
course.
570S. Introduction to mHealth Technologies in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. R, SS, 
STS Mobile phones are catalyzing the delivery of health services and information in low- and middle-income 
countries. Due to global pervasiveness of mobile phones, this mobile health (mHealth) revolution has become a 
centerpiece in efforts to achieve the sustainable development goals, especially universal healthcare. This course 
will provide an introduction to mHealth and follow the mHealth lifecycle—from design to deployment—with 
a strong focus on developing sustainable applications that can be integrated within national health systems in 
developing countries. Students will be introduced to concepts such as user centered design, system architecture, 
business models, and mobile data privacy. Instructor: Vasudevan. One course.
571. Global Maternal and Child Health. SS Provides solid foundation in global perspectives on maternal 
and child health research, practice, and policy. Utilize case analysis to examine critical health challenges facing 
women, children, providers, and policymakers in some of the world’s most vulnerable communities. Course 
designed for graduate and advanced undergraduate students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
573D. One Health: From Philosophy to Practice. NS, SS, STS Interdisciplinary course introducing 
construct of One Health as increasingly important to a holistic understanding of prevention of disease and 
maintenance of health. Includes discussion of bidirectional impact of animal health on human health, impact 
of earth’s changing ecology on health. Learning objectives include 1) to describe how different disciplines 
contribute to the practice of One Health, 2) to creatively design interdisciplinary interventions to improve 
Global Health using a One Health model. Course will include weekly 2-hour multi-campus seminar off-site at 
NC Biotechnology Center with on-campus discussion section using case studies to supplement the seminar. 
Instructor: Pan, Woods. One course.
581. Global Environmental Health Problems: Principles and Case Studies. NS, SS One course. C-L: 
see Environment 581
590S. Special Topics in Global Health. Topics vary depending on semester and section. Topics may 
include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, and global health 
policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Global Health (GLHLTH)426

590S-1. Special Topics in Global Health. Topics vary depending on semester and section. Topics may 
include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, and global health 
policies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
593. Research Independent Study in Global Health. R Individual research-oriented directed study in a 
field of special interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a 
significant academic product. Open only to qualified juniors and seniors by consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies in global health. Instructor: Staff. One course.
630. Air Pollution: From Sources to Health Effects. One course. C-L: see Environment 642
634. Air Quality: Human Exposure and Health Effects. NS, STS C-L: see Environment 604
635. Critical Readings in Environmental Epidemiology. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 633
637S. Population and Environmental Dynamics Influencing Health. NS, SS Course examines 
population, health and environment (PHE) dynamics with focus on interactions in developing or transition 
economies. Theoretical and empirical approaches governing PHE dynamics from multidisciplinary perspectives, 
including geography, public health /epidemiology, demography, and economics. Students will obtain experience 
in design and analysis of PHE studies, and epidemiology of vector-born, chronic and enteric infections. 
Instructor: Pan. One course. C-L: Environment 637S
641. Non-Communicable Diseases in Low- & Middle-Income Countries: Trends, Causes and 
Prevention Strategy. NS, SS, STS Course will provide an overview of the recent (mid-20th century to the 
present) trends in non-communicable disease epidemiology. Focus on four major non-communicable disease 
categories as separate modules: cardiovascular, oncologic, diabetic and pulmonary diseases. Case studies used 
to highlight selected geographic differences. By using lectures, assigned readings and classroom discussion the 
course aims to provide the student with a firm understanding of the shifting disease burden and the landscape of 
stakeholders and interventions to prevent the same. Instructor: Bloomfield. One course.
642S. Designing Innovation for Global Health: From Philanthropy to People. EI, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Public Policy 642S
660. Global Mental Health. CCI, NS, R, SS, STS Examination of global mental health from perspectives 
of culture, public health, epidemiology, human rights, policy, and intervention. Disciplines include cross-
cultural psychiatry, medical anthropology, public mental health, and economics. Topics include ethics, stigma, 
cross-cultural classification of mental health, ethnopsychology, trauma, violence, disasters, and displacement. 
Populations include children, ethnic minorities, refugees, survivors of complex emergencies, and persons 
with chronic disease. Course highlights mixed-methods approaches to research and intervention evaluation. 
Designed for graduate students & advanced undergraduates. Prior research methods course recommended. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Psychology 611, Cultural Anthropology 611, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 660, Human Rights
670. Global Nutrition. EI, NS This class examines global nutrition trends and problems focusing on both 
the US and developing countries. Topics include basic principles of nutrition, research methods for dietary 
assessment, and the epidemiological trends, physiological consequences, and behavioral outcomes of both 
overnutrition (e.g., obesity) and undernutrition (e.g., malnutrition). Emphasis will be placed on intervention 
approaches to improve these outcomes (e.g., supplementation and fortification, community-based programs, 
and nutrition policy). Students will gain a better understanding of basic nutrition, global trends, and best 
practices for improving nutritional status. For graduate or advanced undergraduates. Instructor: Steinberg. One 
course.
671. Global Health and Health Systems in Africa. SS This course is designed to prepare students to work 
in, or pursue study of, the complex institutional environment of global health and health systems in Africa. 
The course braids together four topical strands: (1) the social, political, and economic context of the African 
continent; (2) African conceptions of the “public” and of “health” (3) the origins and evolution of African health 
systems; and (4) the impact on African health systems of transitions in global health governance. The course 
pursues these topics through case studies and team projects focused on issues of global health and health 
systems in representative African countries. Instructor: Toole. One course. C-L: Public Policy 636



Global Health (GLHLTH) 427

672. Health in the African Diaspora. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 660; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 660
673S. Global Surgical Care. SS, STS Lack of access to surgical care threatens the health of people 
throughout the world’s poorest regions, and impacts all areas of health care. This seminar will address issues 
surrounding the delivery of surgical and anesthesia care in low- and middle income countries for students and 
clinical trainees in global health. This course will focus on surgical care delivery and management; workforce, 
training, and education; and economics and finance. The content of this course will be based on the Lancet 
Commission on Global Surgery report and support materials. The format will be a weekly seminar, readings, and 
case studies. Instructor: Rice. One course.
690. Special Topics in Global Health Studies. Topics vary depending on semester and section. Topics 
may include: global health ethics, field methods, health technologies, rapid needs assessment, and global health 
policies. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

The Major
The mission of the global health major is to educate the next generation of scholars and leaders whose 

efforts will improve health and help achieve health equity for all people worldwide. Accordingly, the global 
health major teaches students to approach global health challenges using both disciplinary and interdisciplinary 
perspectives. The global health major is offered only as part of a double major program of study, meaning students 
must complete the global health major requirements along with the requirements of any other undergraduate 
major at Duke. The global health major is composed of five components—core, foundations, electives, experiential 
learning, and a senior seminar. Students must complete eleven courses and an experiential learning requirement, 
in addition to their comajor requirements, as outlined below.

Three Core Courses
• Gateway: Global Health 101 (Fundamentals of Global Health)
• Ethics: Choose from:

• Global Health 210 (Global Health Ethics)
• Global Health 341 (Ethics of Infectious Disease Control)
• Global Health 373 (Global Health Service, Research, & Ethics)
• Global Health 241 (Global Bioethics)

• Methods: Global Health 371/Psychology 309 (Research Methods in Global Health)

Three Foundations Courses
One course from three of the four foundations. See globalhealth.duke.edu for eligible courses. 
• Arts and Humanities in Global Health
• Global Health Systems and Policy
• Natural Science in Global Health
• Social Sciences in Global Health

One Statistics Course
• A course listed/cross-listed in the Department of Statistical Science or
• Biology 204, Economics 208D, Evolutionary Anthropology 381, Mathematics 230, Political Science 

471L, Psychology 201L, Sociology 333

Three Elective Courses
Each major must complete three elective courses from a predetermined list. See globalhealth.duke.edu for 

additional information. Electives must meet the following requirements:
• any 200-level course with a Global Health offering (either owned or cross-listed);
• any course listed as a Foundation course (see above);
• only one 1.0-credit independent study or Bass Connections course (Global Health 391, 393, 395, or 

396) is allowed per student; and
• a maximum of 2.0 credits of preapproved study abroad or transfer credit courses are allowed per 

student.

http://globalhealth.duke.edu
http://globalhealth.duke.edu


 Global Health (GLHLTH)428

Courses from the above categories will be allowed to count as electives, with the constraint that courses 
cannot be double-counted within the major.

Experiential Learning
An experiential learning activity must address and/or engage a global health question, context or challenge. 

Students may fulfill the requirement through DGHI Student Research Training (SRT) program, an internship, 
a civic engagement experience such as those offered by DukeEngage, or a faculty-mentored independent global 
health research project. The experiential learning activity must be preceded by the Ethics core course, be 
preapproved, and be completed prior to the spring semester of senior year. See globalhealth.duke.edu for more 
details on requirements and eligible experiences.

Senior Seminar
Global Health 499, Global Health Capstone. Students are expected to have completed Fundamentals of 

Global Health, Global Health Ethics, Global Health Research Methods and experiential learning prior to enrolling 
in a capstone course.

Graduation with Distinction
The Graduation with Distinction program recognizes students who successfully complete a substantive 

written project evaluated by a committee of three faculty members. Students majoring in global health may pursue 
the following tracks leading to Graduation with Distinction:

• Graduation with distinction in global health
• Graduation with distinction in global health and the non-global health major through a double honors 

thesis 
• Graduation with distinction in the non-global health major
Students interested in graduating with distinction in global health are encouraged to pursue a double honors 

thesis, in order to integrate what they have learned in the two majors. Students must complete their thesis under 
the mentorship of a Duke Global Health Institute (DGHI) faculty member or affiliate who has experience guiding 
undergraduate student research. Students who meet the eligibility requirements must submit an application form 
by the last day of Drop/Add of the fall semester of their senior year.

The Minor
Students pursuing a minor in global health must complete the following five course requirements:
• Gateway: Global Health 101 (Fundamentals of Global Health)
• Ethics: Choose from:

• Global Health 210 (Global Health Ethics)
• Global Health 341 (Ethics of Infectious Disease Control)
• Global Health 373 (Global Health Service, Research, Ethics)
• Global Health 241 (Global Bioethics)

• Three electives in Global Health. Students must complete three global health courses. Cross-listed 
courses are acceptable, but courses taken Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory and Advanced Placement credits 
do not count toward the minor. Electives must meet the following requirements:
• course must include a Global Health offering (either owned or cross-listed);
• only one 1.0-credit independent study or Bass Connection course (Global Health 391, 393, 395, or 

396) is allowed per student; and
• a maximum of 2.0 credits of preapproved study abroad or transfer credit courses are allowed per 

student.

Greek
For courses in Greek, see Classical Studies on page 244.

Health, Wellness, and Physical Education
For courses in health, wellness, and physical education, see page 601. 

http://globalhealth.duke.edu


History (HISTORY) 429

Hebrew
For courses in Hebrew, see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 201. 

Hindi
For courses in Hindi, see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 202. 

History
Professor Ramaswamy, Chair; Professor Hacohen, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Balleisen, 
Deutsch, Duara, L. Dubois, Edwards, French, Gaspar, Glymph, Hacohen, Humphreys, MacLean, Martin, M. 
Miller, Olcott, Partner, Ramaswamy, Robisheaux, and Sigal; Associate Professors Barr, Bonker, Ewald, Huston, 
Krylova, Lentz-Smith, Malegam, Mazumdar, Neuschel, Peck, Thorne, and Stern; Assistant Professors Barnes, 
Chappel, Hepler-Smith, Marquez, and Mestyan; Professors Emeriti Chafe, English, Herrup, Koonz, Kuniholm, 
Mauskopf, Nathans, Reddy, Roland, Shatzmiller, and Wood; Visiting Associate Professor Kaiwar; Visiting Assis-
tant Professors K. Dubois and Freeman

A major and a minor are available in this department.
History courses offer students from all disciplines within the university an opportunity to investigate the 

past, gain perspective on the present, and improve their critical faculties. History provides an integrating principle 
for the entire learning process, and students of history gain a sense of human development, an understanding 
of fundamental and lasting social processes, and a feeling for human interrelatedness. History courses train the 
mind by improving skills in communicating thought and imagination. History graduates are prominent in all 
fields of economy, society, and culture. 

Courses in History (HISTORY)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Global History. CCI, CZ, W Explore problems in the history of globalization. Learn 
how contemporary problems and opportunities of globalization reflect long-term processes marked by patterns, 
interruptions, and continuities even within radical change. Asia, Europe and Africa have been interconnected 
since the Bronze Age. Trade, microbes, political power and religions formed then, as today, the principal matrix 
in which interdependence and conflict developed. In what ways is the environmental and climate crisis today 
different from that of the Little Ice Age? Can technology continue to allow humans to ‘conquer’ nature so we that 
may keep expanding resources on an exhausted earth? What alternatives exist globally? Instructor: Duara and 
Martin. One course.
103. Comparative Approaches to Global Issues. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 195; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 195, Political Science 110, Sociology 195, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 195, Marxism and Society
105. Old Worlds/New Histories, 500-1500 CE. CCI, CZ, SS New approaches to history of the world from 
ca. 500 to 1500 CE. Examines the world before European hegemony. Topics may include nature of autonomous 
centers of production around the globe; characteristics of trade, empire, science, technology, and high culture 
across Asia, the Middle East, Africa and the Americas; diffusion of inventions, ideas, cultures and religions 
through travel, trade, state and empire building. Readings and films explore diverse cosmopolitan worlds before 
the coming of modernity. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 134, Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 105, Marxism and Society
106. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science. CCI, CZ, STS This 
course surveys the history of science from the sixteenth century through the present day. It addresses science 
not just as a body of knowledge and methods but as a cultural activity that has shaped and been shaped by 
modern global history. Topics will range across physical sciences, life sciences, earth and environmental 
sciences, and social sciences. This course takes a global perspective, with emphasis on parallels, differences, 
and interconnections among ways of knowing nature in different places and times, as well as the role of 
specific materials, environments, technologies, and practical problems in the development of modern science. 
Instructor: Hepler-Smith. One course. C-L: Science & Society 118, International Comparative Studies 118, 



 History (HISTORY)430

International Comparative Studies, Energy and the Environment, Ethics Elective, Science & Society
107D. Introduction to the History of Economic and Business Cultures. CZ, EI, SS Offers students a 
comparative introduction to economic cultures and business practices in different historical contexts. Examines 
diverse concepts of ethics in business dealings, market transactions, and economic policies. By exploring 
differences over time and space, students will better understand what is particular to our own practices. 
Particularly useful for students planning to concentrate in Economic and Business Cultures as History majors. 
Instructor: Partner. One course. C-L: Economics 111D, Markets and Management Studies
108. History of Rock: Rhythm & Blues and Rock & Roll to Indie Rock and Hip-Hop. ALP, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Music 143; also C-L: African & African American Studies 139
109. Introduction to the History of Human Rights and Social Movements. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Explores 
the history of human rights and conceptions of human rights in different historical contexts. Considers a range 
of social movements, including environmental, civil rights, women’s rights, and sexual liberation movements. 
Particularly useful for students planning to concentrate in Human Rights and Social Movements as History 
majors. Instructor: MacLean. One course.
110. Introduction to the History of Law and Governance. CZ, EI, SS Offers students a comparative 
introduction to legal cultures and governance practices in different parts historical contexts. Examines law and 
governance as an attempt to both foster and enforce ethical norms. Course themes include representations and 
justifications of rule; policy making; the legal and political construction of property, insiders and outsiders, 
legal procedure and constructions of justice. By exploring differences over time and space, students will better 
understand what is particular to our own practices. Particularly useful for students planning to concentrate in 
Law and Governance as History majors. Instructor: Huston. One course. C-L: Public Policy 161
112. Sexual Pleasure in the Modern World. CCI, CZ, EI Interdisciplinary study of ways societies around 
the globe have understood sexual pleasure. Investigates ethics of the manners in which people have explored 
sexual pleasure and ways that such pleasure relates to creation of the modern person. Emphasizes effects of 
colonialism and development of race in relation to sexuality. Includes an extensive discussion of pornography, 
sexual fantasy, orgasm and virtual sex, asking how sexual pleasure relates to histories of danger and violence. 
Instructor: Sigal. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 116
113. Introduction to the History of Medicine. CZ, STS Covers the history of western medicine from 
Ancient Greece to the 21st century. Students will engage with primary and secondary sources that expose 
the varied understandings of health, disease causation, and treatment that have prevailed over time. As an 
introductory course with no prerequisites, this class welcomes all students with an interest in history, health, 
and disease, while assuming no prior medical or scientific knowledge. It illuminates the trajectory of western 
medicine from the humors of Hippocrates to the genetic medicine of today. Instructor: Humphreys. One course. 
C-L: Global Health 174
114. Intro to the History of Modern Warfare. CZ, EI, SS The course covers the history of warfare since 
the end of the eighteenth century. Our explorations focus on the nature and aims of European and US pursuits 
of war and the practices, languages, and experiences of its participants. We will pay special attention to the 
different ways in which militaries and civilian populations became the subjects and objects of warfare in the 
modern age. Instructor: Bonker. One course. C-L: Public Policy 160
115. Introduction to the History of Women, Gender, and Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Comparative 
introduction to historical contingencies of sex roles, gender identities, and sexual practices. Explores ethical 
understandings of sexual practices, sex-defined labor roles, and legal codes (e.g., sex-specific labor laws, 
citizenship restrictions, marriage and nationality laws, etc.). Examines differences over time and space to better 
understand what is particular to our own practices and expectations. Particularly useful for students planning to 
concentrate in Women, Gender, and Sexuality as History majors.Instructor: Krylova. One course. C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 115, Study of Sexualities 115
117. Early Modern Europe. CCI, CZ, SS, STS A survey of Europe between approx. 1440-1750 that 
highlights changes in European society including the end of the Renaissance, the Reformation, the Scientific 
Revolution and the European encounter with other regions of the world. Instructor: Martin, Neuschel, or 
Robisheaux. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 125
120. A History of American Democracy: Everything You Need to Know about US History in 



History (HISTORY) 431

One Semester. CCI, CZ This course explores the sweep of US history, from the colonial period to the 
present, through the complicated, conflicted topic of democracy. It takes a broad view of democracy, which 
includes different people’s hopes for their own lives and their visions of the social order as well as public 
policy, governing institutions, and political participation. In this course, we approach democracy as a moving 
target, not a well-defined destination. Not only did conceptions of democracy change over time, but Americans 
also disagreed—often violently—over its meaning. We are still living with the implications today. Instructor: 
Edwards. One course.
121. Introduction to Contemporary Latin America. CCI, CZ Interdisciplinary introduction to the 
peoples, cultures, and burning issues of contemporary Latin America and the Caribbean. Required course for 
students seeking the certificate in Latin American Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Latin American 
Studies 121, International Comparative Studies 121
122. History of Latinxs in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS This introductory course will cover the social, 
cultural, and political histories of Latino/as in the United States from 1848 to the present including the Treaty 
of Guadalupe Hidalgo, the Great Depression, WWI/WWII, the creation of Latino/a civil rights organizations, 
and the civil wars and free trade agreements of the 1980s and 1990s that have spurned so much of contemporary 
migration. Themes include colonialism and conquest, sexuality and gender, race and ethnicity, transnationalism 
and migration, social inequality and practices of resistance. This class will highlight the diversity of the 
Latino/a experience—focusing on the history of Afro-Latino/as, queer Latino/as, and undocumented Latino/as. 
Instructor: Marquez. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies 122, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 122, 
International Comparative Studies 122, Latin American Studies, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
123. Private Wealth and Public Giving: A Modern History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Surveys the entangled 
relationship between private wealth and public giving over the past few centuries of capitalist modernity in 
Asia, Europe, and the United States. Explores how the entrepreneurial impulse to make money has also been 
shadowed by the ethical imperative to give it away. Analysis of the circumstances and contexts in which the 
apparent altruism of givers is also motivated by self-interest. The major topics include study of religious giving; 
the historical roots of philanthropy in the age of imperialism; the evolution of ideas of “Trusteeship” and 
“creative capitalism;” gender and philanthropy; and “celebrity” philanthropy. Instructor: Ramamswamy. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 177, Study of Ethics 123, International Comparative Studies 123
124. History of the Present. CCI, CZ, R Examines the history of the past forty years, focusing on the United 
States in a global context. Themes might include: globalization, inequality, the rise of the alt-right, climate 
change, the internet, and the emergence of finance and consulting. Prepares students to think historically about 
their own world, and gives them the opportunity to use historical methods to think about the forces shaping 
their lives, their families, and their potential careers. Draws on a wide variety of sources and genres: alongside 
more traditional academic readings, students might be exposed to digital storytelling, journalism, television, and 
video games. Instructor: Chappel and Marquez. One course. C-L: Public Policy 123
125S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach. ALP, R, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary 
Studies 105S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 106S, Political Science 105S, Public Policy 170S, Visual and Media 
Studies 106S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
126S. Introduction to Oral History. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 110S
127FS. Globalization and Corporate Citizenship. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 160FS; also 
C-L: Public Policy 187FS, Economics 112FS
128. War and Society in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. ALP, CCI, CZ An introduction to war and 
society from about 500 to 1600 in western Europe. This course looks at the sources of conflict and the ways 
warrior identity and violence generally were culturally supported. The course will emphasize reading in primary 
sources, including documents and literature. Instructor: Neuschel. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 128
129. Introduction to African Studies (DS3 or DS4). ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 103; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 105, Political Science 108, International 
Comparative Studies 110
130D. American Dreams and American Realities. CCI, CZ Examines the role of such myths as “rags 
to riches,” “beacon to the world,” “the frontier” and “foreign devil” in defining the American character and 



 History (HISTORY)432

determining hopes, fears, dreams, and actions throughout American History. Attention given to the surface 
consistency of these myths as accepted by each immigrant group versus the shifting content of the myths as they 
change to reflect the hopes and values of each of these groups. Instructor: Wilson. One course.
135. Silk Roads and China, Ancient and Medieval Transformations. CCI, CZ The Silk Roads are 
the oldest and longest routes of cultural communication and economic exchange connecting Asia, Europe and 
Africa. In use since the days of Alexander the Great, the Roads and its rail networks now extend from China 
to England, connecting 70 countries and forming a vital system. This course introduces the ancient to early 
modern histories, cultures, and religions of the Silk Roads anchored in four themes: Alexander’s empire; life 
in medieval cities of Chang’an, Baghdad and Constantinople; Silk Roads religions and the interactions of 
Buddhism, Christianity, Judaism and Islam; and the Mongol empire visited through the travels of Marco Polo. 
Instructor: Mazumdar. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 207, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
135, Religion 181
140S. Empires in Modern European History. CCI, CZ, SS An introduction to political theories 
of imperialism and a comparative historical analysis of several European empires. Explores questions of 
nationalism, race, religious pluralism, state formation, globalization, and international governance. Readings 
drawn from history, sociology, anthropology, and political science. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political 
Science 140S, Sociology 148S, Cultural Anthropology 140S
150S. Birth of the West: Thinking about the Greek Origins of Western Civilization. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 171S
152S. Gateway Seminar: History at Sea. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Maritime history through examination of 
ships, shipping, and shipboard communities. Topics addressed include shipboard language, labor, rituals, 
technology, aesthetics, and power, as well as free and forced maritime migrations. Discussion of the ways ships 
and shipping created the world in which we live. Instructor: Ewald. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 152S
156S. Gateway Seminar: Cold War America. CZ, EI, R, SS, W A gateway seminar designed to introduce 
undergraduates to historical analysis, research, and writing through study of one of the most gripping and hotly 
debated periods of modern history: the early Cold War contest between the US and the USSR. The course will 
examine both foreign relations and domestic life, with a focus on the searing impact of a politics of fear. We will 
explore areas ranging from the dropping of the atomic bomb to McCarthyism, from the crippling of the civil 
rights movement and the purge of gays from government employment to the devastating 1950s interventions 
in Iran, Guatemala, and Vietnam. Instructor: MacLean. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 156S, Human Rights
157S. Gateway Seminar: Empires in Historical Perspective. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Study of modern 
empires in historical comparative-connective perspective. Approaches, methods, themes include social history 
from below, maritime history, history of technology, debates about the ethicality of war, occupation and regime 
change in sovereign territories. Final research paper involving intensive primary-source research, extensive use 
of secondary and on-line sources for the study of empires. Instructor: Kaiwar. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 157S
158S. Gateway Seminar: Islam and Nationalism. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W This course offers students an 
introduction to the history of the 19th- and 20th-century Muslim world, using the lens of the development 
of different forms of nationalism. We will investigate both the intellectual roots and expressions of various 
nationalisms, as well as the social and political factors behind popular mobilization. The class will be focused on 
several case studies, including Egypt, Algeria, India-Pakistan, Iran, Sudan, and Nigeria. Students work will be 
focused on weekly readings, and on a semester-long research project. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Islamic 
Studies
159S. Gateway Seminar: What Did Your Grandparents Do? A Global Exploration of Individual 
Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R This course will focus on the stories of individuals and their experiences of the 
great historical events of the 20th century. Students will read from a wide variety of oral histories, memoirs, 
biographies and primary source materials such as diaries and letters, with an emphasis on the lives of relatively 
unknown figures such as farmers, merchants and housewives. The goal will be to both understand and connect 
imaginatively with the life experiences of the people who lived history rather than those who made it. Students 
will also explore the diverse stories of their own families and related networks. Instructor: Partner. One course. 



History (HISTORY) 433

C-L: Documentary Studies 159S
160S. Gateway Seminar: The Global Sixties: Race, Revolution, Sexuality. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W The 
1960s in global context, focusing particularly on Europe, Latin America, and the United States. The rise of 
mass movements dedicated to racial, economic, and sexual justice, against the backdrop of Cold War and 
decolonization. The mobilization of music, film, and the body in the service of revolution, with attention also to 
the global backlash and the rise of a new conservativism. Course materials include memoirs, speeches, political 
treatises, and cultural artifacts from the period. Instructor: Chappel. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 160S, Study of Sexualities 160S
161S. Gateway Seminar: How to Do History. EI, R, SS Examines innovative approaches to researching 
and writing history. Addresses key methodological issues, including techniques historians use to interpret 
the past and the political stakes. Topics include critical approaches to race, gender and colonialism. How do 
historians construct their objects of study? What count as primary sources? How do we read them critically? 
How do historians formulate analytic questions and arguments? What narrative techniques do they use? 
What are the stages of a research project? Emphasis on primary research and writing in second half of course. 
Students conduct original research in archives of their choice; workshop; and write research papers. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
162S. Gateway Seminar: Asia in Global History. CCI, CZ, SS The goal of the course is to first explore 
the most important networks and flows that connected the Asian region to the Eurasian world since the ancient 
Silk Route and the spread of Buddhism through the new dynamics of the Early Modern World--16th to 18th 
centuries. The second part of the course probes the new dynamics that integrated Asian societies through 
Western capitalism and imperial forces in the 19th and 20th centuries. It will also cover the ‘rise of Asia’ in the 
current era of globalization. Instructor: Duara. One course.
163S. Gateway Seminar: Gandhi, King, Mandela. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Focuses on the words and actions 
of Mahatma Gandhi, Martin Luther King, Jr., and Nelson Mandela, in order to understand the politics and 
ethics of non-violent civil disobedience across the world; considers local and global forces that shaped the lives 
and histories of these men; traces both arc and archive of disobedient actions by these men to ask why the 
twentieth century has been prone to such acts of dissidence; explores the role of photography, film, art, and the 
internet in shaping our contemporary memories of these leaders; and offers opportunity to write a research 
paper that will consider whether civil disobedience is a “dangerous” idea. Instructor: Ramaswamy. One course. 
C-L: African & African American Studies 163S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 177S, International Comparative 
Studies 163S
164S. Gateway Seminar - Antisemitism: Ethnicity, Race, Religion, Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, R, 
SS Focuses on selected anti-Judaic and antisemitic episodes from ancient antiquity through modern times, 
paying attention to both antisemitic texts and events. It evaluates competing theoretical frameworks for 
understanding antisemitism as ethnic, racial, religious and cultural phenomenon. Can antisemitism be 
understood as part of the history of racism or of other forms of ethnic hatred? Why were Jews so often target of 
hatred? How did both Jews and antisemites view their relations with each other? How do historians understand 
them? If there is limited continuity among antisemitic episodes, how can the prevalence and repetitiveness of 
antisemitism be explained? Instructor: Hacohen. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 164S
166S. Gateway Seminar - Anarchism and its Discontents. CCI, CZ, EI, R Introduction to the 19th 
century philosophical foundations of anarchist thought and to the history of the major anarchist movements 
in the 20th century in Russia, Italy and Spain. The first part of the course is an intensive investigation of the 
thought of Michael Bakunin, Pierre-Joseph Proudhon, Leo Tolstoy and Peter Kropotkin suing selections from 
their own writings. The next unit focuses on the movements they inspired in Russia and Western Europe. 
The last unit concerns the more contemporary manifestations of anarchism in the U.S. under the influence of 
Murray Bookshin. Students will write a major paper due at the end of the course. Instructor: Miller. One course. 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 166S
167S. Gateway Seminar: Nationalism: Ideology, Technology, Globalization. CCI, CZ, SS What is 
a nation? What is a nation state? Is the nation state still a useful unit of government today? The goal of this 
seminar is to teach you theoretical and methodological tools and historical examples to critically think about 
nationalism in globalization. Readings include primary sources, classic theories on nationalism, fresh arguments 
from sociology and anthropology. The historical and contemporary case studies include American, Middle 



 History (HISTORY)434

Eastern, South Asian, and European examples. Instructor: Mestyan. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
167S, Sociology 167S
171S. Gateway Seminar: History of Intimacy: Family, Friendship, Romance. CCI, CZ, R, 
W Examines how changing definitions of friendship, family structure, childhood, romantic love, gender roles, 
and sexual orientation shaped identity formation, social conflict, and cultural production through time. Course 
materials include letters, diaries, autobiographies, novels, government documents, and films, in addition to 
academic articles and books. Students produce final projects based in original research and significant secondary 
reading. Time period and geographical focus varies with instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
172S. Gateway Seminar: History of Calypso. CCI, CZ This course explores the origins, development 
and the historical, social, political, economic, and cultural significance of the musical form called Calypso 
which emerged in the Caribbean during the era of colonization & plantation slavery by the 19th century. The 
aspirations of Caribbean peoples are expressed and captured in calypso within and outside the Caribbean 
wherever they formed new communities of immigrants. Some of the themes to be examined in the course 
include Caribbean politics, international affairs, empire, colonialism, imperialism, race, gender, migration, 
carnival, movies, World War I and II and calypso abroad in the United States and United Kingdom. Instructor: 
Gaspar. One course.
173S. Gateway Seminar: We All Want to Change the World: Writing the History of Good 
Intentions. CZ, EI, R, W Introduces students to skills of critical research and historiography with 
an emphasis on writing and research design. Students devise a research project to investigate either an 
international or transnational historical episode that sought to address a major problem but led to unintended 
consequences. Examples might include an immigration policy, a military campaign, a humanitarian aid 
program, or an economic development project. We will spend first few weeks discussing secondary works 
of similar topics. Students will choose research topic in consultation with instructor. Instructor: Olcott. One 
course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 173S
174S. Gateway Seminar: Regime Change/U.S. Foreign Policy: Latin America and Beyond. CCI, 
CZ, EI, R, SS Examines episodes of U.S. intervention abroad that resulted in the overthrow of democratically 
elected regimes. Focus on Latin America as the primary region of study, but comparative cases are also 
examined. Consideration of cultural, social, and economic tools of intervention as well as military and 
diplomatic methods. Students divide into research teams and write histories of four U.S. interventions abroad. 
Instructor: Olcott. One course.
175S. Gateway Seminar - The United States and the World. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Research and 
discussion seminar examining the place of America in the wider world, and ethical underpinnings of American 
expansion. Explores how Americans have viewed and defined themselves in relation to numerous “others.” 
Investigates how and why a sense of mission has driven cultural, political, and geographic expansion. Instructor: 
Lentz-Smith. One course.
176S. Gateway Seminar: The European Union: History and Prospects. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS The 
European Union in global context, focusing on its history while also considering its future prospects. Examines 
the roots of the EU in the post-World War II period, as well as its rapid expansion since the end of the Cold 
War. Adopts an integrated approach, weaving together cultural, military, and economic affairs. Course materials 
include memoirs, speeches, literature, film, as well as academic literature from history and political science. 
Instructor: Chappel. One course. C-L: Public Policy 176S
177S. Gateway Seminar: The Meaning of Freedom in American History. CZ, R, W Focus on 
American conflicts over the meaning of “freedom” or “liberty.” Examination of changing definitions over 
time, and appraisal of the role that conflicts over “freedom” play in defining American identity and politics in 
the present. Course readings (mostly primary sources) introduce students to central disputes over meanings 
of “freedom” in American history, and student papers will also investigate conflicts or ideas about liberty. 
Instructor: Huston. One course.
178S. Gateway Seminar: History of Imprisonment. CCI, CZ, EI Course centers the United States within 
a broader geographic examination of the history of prisons. Looks at how states have used penal spaces as tools 
of punishment; considers consequences of the shifting terrain of people positioned outside of “normalized” 
society and what it means to be criminally “othered.” Interrogates consequences of the ideological shift of the 
penitentiary from a reformative endeavor to one of punishment and explores ramifications of the changed moral 



History (HISTORY) 435

imperative of the penitentiary on the racial composition of penal spaces. Instructor: Staff. One course.
179S. Gateway Seminar: Capitalism & Its Critics. CZ, EI, R, W Surveys major advocates, critics, and 
reformers of capitalism, from Adam Smith, Charles Dickens, and Karl Marx to contemporary champions and 
opponents of “free market” reform. Instructor: Huston. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 
179S
180S. Gateway Seminar - Story-Telling, Truth-Telling and History. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R The borders 
between history and fiction. History theory and the methods of historical inquiry. Researching and writing 
history and fiction. Authorial voice and audience. Myth, legend, history. Examples of history and fiction drawn 
from ancient, medieval, and early modern eras (Western Europe), with thematic emphases on war, violence, 
religion, and societal crisis. Instructor: Dubois. One course.
181S. Gateway Seminar: Native American History Through Autobiography. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W This 
course begins to explore history from the point of view of Native Americans. Instructor: Deutsch. One course.
182S. Gateway Seminar: American Slavery and Freedom: The Rise and Destruction of Slavery 
in the US. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W This seminar explores the profound ways in which the rise of racial slavery 
shaped the history of the US, the most powerful slaveholding society in the western world. The course focuses 
on the role of race, gender, and gender relations in the establishment, organization, and maintenance of slavery 
in the American South and the intersection of these issues with questions of citizenship, labor, and sexuality. 
Course materials include letters, diaries, memoirs, fiction, legal documents, visual archives, and secondary 
sources. This course aims to help students develop a historical understanding of the past and skills in critical 
inquiry, research, and writing. Instructor: Glymph. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 182S
183S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Study of crucial legal 
and political moments in the struggle for equal civil rights of minorities, beginning with the laws of Chinese 
Exclusion, the struggle to define who was “White,” the Asian Immigration Exclusion Acts, the relationships 
of Asians and African Americans and the struggle for equal schooling in the American South, the Japanese 
Concentration camps, the Redress and Reparations Civil Rights struggle, and the involvement of Asians 
Americans in the African American-led Civil Rights Movement in the 1960s, including working with Martin 
Luther King and Malcolm X, and Asian Americans in the anti-sweatshop unionization movement. Instructor: 
Mazumdar. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 187S, African & African American Studies 133S, 
International Comparative Studies 183S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 183S, Public 
Policy 175S, Human Rights
184S. Gateway Seminar: China at War. CZ, W Investigates China’s experiences in multiple wars between 
1894 and 1953. Places events in their historical context through comparative analysis of revolutions in China, 
Korea, and Japan, which set the stage for twentieth-century conflicts in East Asia. Introduces students to 
historiography through examination of what we know about historical events as well as interpretation of those 
events in historical scholarship. Readings include secondary and primary sources. Instructor: Barnes. One 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 137S
185S. Gateway Seminar: Disease in the Premodern World. CCI, CZ Using primary sources students 
will explore the impact, management and changing definitions of disease in various pre-modern societies. 
We look at disease in the context of encounters, environmental change and state formation between 100 and 
1700CE. Not just understood as a biological phenomenon, disease can also work as signifying system, creating 
status hierarchies and highlighting particular social and political anxieties. Through the study of five or six 
historical epidemics, students will learn how to create historical resources out of medical sources. Instructor: 
Malegam. One course.
186S. Gateway Seminar: Living Through the Great War. CCI, CZ, R, W Course examines experiences 
of participants in World War I, known as the Great War: why did they go to war willingly at first, and how did 
they come to terms with its absurdity and horror? Examines what the war means to us,100 years later. Read 
letters, poetry, novels and memoirs and see films made by participants in the war and from later eras. Serves as 
an introduction to historical research and writing. Includes a variety of research and writing tasks, both formal 
and informal, which enable students to engage with the work of others and articulate a position with regard to 
historical interpretations. Instructor: Neuschel. One course.
187S. Political Culture in Africa. CCI, CZ, R, W This course examines the history of political institutions 



 History (HISTORY)436

in Africa. Beginning with pre-colonial political formations in a variety of African contexts, ranging from small-
scale societies to large multi-ethnic states, it then examine the question of how European colonialism impacted 
existing African political culture and introduced or transformed institutions of governance, before moving to 
consider the political history of post-colonial Africa. Instructor: Staff. One course.
188S. Gateway Seminar: The Price of Sex: Gender and the Global Political Economy. CZ, EI, R, 
SS, W Explores how sex and gender have shaped economic policies and opportunities in different settings, 
particularly in the modern era (19th, 20th, and 21st centuries). Will focus on public policies and normative 
practices at the local, national, and international levels. As a gateway seminar for the history major, will 
focus on developing an understanding of historiography and methodology culminating in a prospectus for a 
future research project. Instructor: Olcott. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 188S, 
International Comparative Studies 188S
190. Special Topics in History. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in History. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Topics in Focus Program. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Current list of courses 
available in the Focus program brochure and online. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in History. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190SA. Duke-Administerd Study Abroad: Special Topics in History. Seminar version of History 190A. 
Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
191L. Independent Study: Digital India Lab. A digital humanities course for pursuing projects related 
to South Asia; students pursue any digital project of their choice related to Indian history, culture, literature, 
religion and politics; topics to be approved by instructor; no prerequisites, although having taken a South Asia 
course on campus recommended. Instructor: Freeman/Ramaswamy. Half course.
201. Globalization and History. CCI, CZ, SS Examination of globalization issues in a historical perspective. 
Reviews phenomena, institutions, e.g. empires, states, religion, corporation, and international agencies, and 
policies which enabled exchange of commodities, people, and cultures. Explores empirical evidence on growth 
and development for different world regions and historians’ and social scientists’ interpretations. Examines 
benefit of maintaining fine balance between quantitative evidence and historical analysis in assessing waning 
international integration of societies, markets, and cultures from first wave of European expansion to the 
present. Instructor: Zanalda. One course. C-L: Public Policy 236
202. Gender and Socialism. CCI, CZ, EI, SS History of socialist feminism as a global political movement 
and philosophical-theoretical tradition with a special focus on its divergent national trajectories and conflict-
ridden relationship with liberal feminism and socialist and communist movements and governments in Europe, 
Russia, China and US since the nineteenth century; offers an overview of European, Russian, Chinese and US 
history of the last two centuries; includes exploration of principles and aspirations that informed socialist theory 
of modern society, social justice, family, motherhood, parenthood, sexual difference, gender equality as well as 
public policies and legislation instituted or informed by the socialist tradition. Instructor: Krylova. One course. 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 216, International Comparative Studies 216
203. History of Global Health. CCI, CZ, SS, STS The course begins with the development of ancient 
medicine in Europe & China, and continues into the rise of biomedicine (e.g. laboratory science & microbiology) 
in the 19th and 20th centuries. Particular diseases illustrate important themes, such as the role of warfare in 
medical developments, the creation of international policy to control disease, and how non-Western societies 
intersected biomedicine. We trace global circulations of people and commodities to show how international 
agencies, charities and governing bodies have spread both disease and the means to fight it. Medicine has always 
been a global undertaking, and its history prepares us to address emerging health crises. Instructor: Humphreys. 
One course. C-L: Global Health 203
204. Modern Africa. CCI, CZ, SS Focuses on African history in twentieth century. Explores history of 
European colonialism, African nationalism, and the roots of contemporary African issues ranging from 
conflict and governance to social and cultural effects of economic transformations, pandemic diseases and 
environmental degradation. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 210, 
International Comparative Studies 268



History (HISTORY) 437

205. Health and Healing in Africa. CCI, CZ, SS, STS Examines how various communities in Africa have 
experienced, perceived, and treated maladies from the precolonial era to the present time. Places illness and 
therapy in specific historical contexts. Topics include hunger and famine; “old world” diseases such as small 
pox; disease and colonial conquest (c1880-1920); colonial regimes and health; and viruses that have emerged in 
Africa since c1975. Instructor: Ewald. One course. C-L: Global Health 205
206. East Africa and the World. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
319; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 316
207. Humanitarianism in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI Focuses on the historical impact on Africa of international 
humanitarian movements. Includes anti-slavery movement, missionary Christianity, Congo Reform Association, 
environmentalism, development, disaster aid, fight against HIV/AIDS. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 271, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 207, Islamic 
Studies, Human Rights
208. South Africa: Past and Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 214; also C-L: Political Science 221, Public Policy 214, Human Rights, International Comparative Studies
209S. Islam in Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 370S; also C-L: Religion 378S, International 
Comparative Studies 370S, Islamic Studies
210. Islamic Civilization I. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 375; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
256, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 268, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 122, Ethics Elective, Information 
Science + Studies, Islamic Studies
211. Islamic Civilization II. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 376; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
257, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 269, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 185, International Comparative 
Studies, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies
212. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 186; also C-L: Religion 228, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 287, Islamic Studies
213S. Gender and Slavery in the Americas. CCI, CZ, EI, W Atlantic slave systems were gendered 
systems. Across lines of nation and empire, African-descended women and their reproductive labor were crucial 
to the formation of New World slave systems and the racial ideology that underwrote them. The study of gender 
is therefore critical in understanding slavery in the Americas. This course analyzes slave systems in North 
America, Latin America, and the Caribbean. Our aim will be to explore major points of emphasis in the histories 
of gender and slavery in these diverse locales. For their final project, students will have the opportunity to 
engage an area of this historiography more deeply in the form of a paper on a topic of their choosing. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 216S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 211S
214. The Modern Middle East. CCI, CZ The historical development of the Middle East in the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries. The emergence of nation-states in the region following World War I. Instructor: 
Mestyan. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 258, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 127, Islamic Studies, 
International Comparative Studies
215S. Shamanism and Spirit Possession. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Religion 213S; also 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 214S, International Comparative Studies 256S
216S. Between Moscow, Beijing and Delhi: Narratives of Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 373S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 373S, Islamic 
Studies
217S. Nigeria: A Modern History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 285S; 
also C-L: International Comparative Studies 242S
218. Modern & Global India. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Examines the historical foundations for the emergence 
of India as a modern and global society with a focus on the Mughal empire, British colonialism, and Indian 
nationalism. Uses textual and visual sources for charting how local political, social-economic and cultural 
factors intersect with the global movements of peoples, goods, technologies, and ideas in the creation of the 
modern nation-state of India. Concludes with discussion of globalization of Indian labor, food, and Bollywood. 
Time frame from 1500 to present. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 357, 
International Comparative Studies 218



 History (HISTORY)438

219S. Indian Civilization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Surveys the rise of civilization and kingdoms on the Indian 
subcontinent from the first urban centers of the Indus Valley through the establishment of the Mughal Empire in 
the 16th century. Uses literary, archeological, linguistic, ethnological, and inscriptional evidence on the diversity 
of Indic peoples and their complex social, religious, and caste integration into the major states and empires 
of pre-modern India; considers wider civilizational networks and extensions of the Indian cultural sphere 
into other parts of Asia; integrates a historical and anthropological perspective on various primary materials. 
Instructor: Freeman. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 215S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 157S
220. China from Antiquity to 1400. CCI, CZ Beginning with the early neolithic cultures, focus on the 
evolution of Han civilization, the formation of the imperial state system in China, ecological adaptations and 
foundations of the agrarian economy, the coming of Buddhism to China, and China’s contacts with other peoples 
and regions of Asia up to A.D. 1400. Instructor: Mazumdar. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
136
221. Food, Farming, and Feminism. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 275; also C-L: Environment 209, Global Health 225
222. Environment and Global Capitalism in Latin America. CZ, R, SS, W Global capitalism relies 
on the ever increasing extraction and displacement of natural resources around the world. The discovery and 
subsequent colonization of Latin America by European powers meant the massive circulation of organisms 
(from germs to human beings) and natural resources (organic and mineral) across continents with lasting 
consequences for humans, animals and landscapes. Focusing on Latin America, this course analyzes the 
environmental history of global capitalism. Our aim will be to explore what happens when massive amounts of 
natural resources are relocated from one place to another. Instructor: Goldin. One course. C-L: Latin American 
Studies 222, Environment 223, Latin American Studies
223. Survey of Modern China 1800-Present. CCI, CZ The course introduces the broad political and social 
changes of the last two hundred years in China beginning with the Qing imperial era and the last emperors, 
to the Opium Wars, the turning point of the Taiping Rebellion, the Republican Revolution and Communist 
Revolution; with focus and introduction to critical thought on imperialism, nationalism and ethnicity, revolution 
and social change using primary documents, secondary readings and films. Instructor: Barnes. One course. C-L: 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 234
224A. Themes in Chinese Culture and History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
343A; also C-L: Political Science 298A, International Comparative Studies
225S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 219S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 209S, International Comparative Studies 365S, Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 224S, Cultural Anthropology 224S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219S
226. Ancient and Early Modern Japan. CCI, CZ Japan from earliest settlement to 1868; the Heian Court, 
rise of the samurai, feudal society and culture, the Tokugawa age, and the Meiji Restoration. Instructor: Partner. 
One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 167, International Comparative Studies
227. The Emergence of Modern Japan. CCI, CZ A survey of modern Japanese history from 1850 to the 
present. Emphasis on social change as experienced by ordinary people. Includes a comparative overview of 
Japan’s experience of modernity. This class is not open to students who have taken History 122A. Instructor: 
Partner. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 169, International Comparative Studies
228. Chinatowns: A Cultural History. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 335; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 336
229S. Global Men and Masculinities. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 374S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 274S, Sociology 375S, Literature 374S
230. Greek History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 283
231. Ancient Athletics. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 262
233. Roman History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 284
234. Democracy: Ancient and Modern. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 275; also 
C-L: Political Science 211, Study of Ethics 275



History (HISTORY) 439

235. Drugs, Chemicals, and Health: Histories of Substances in Economies, Environments, and 
Bodies. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS This course asks how we might think historically about synthetic chemicals, 
natural alternatives, and the benefits and hazards they pose to human health, society, and environments. 
Combining cultural, political, and economic history with interdisciplinary environmental history and science 
& technology studies, we will follow historical “biographies” and “genealogies” of drugs and chemicals through 
economies, environments, and bodies, from cellular to planetary scales, comparing and connecting different 
global settings (including North Carolina). Focal substances may include aluminum, antiretrovirals, DDT, gold, 
indigo, mercury, nicotine, quinine, and opioids. Instructor: Hepler-Smith. One course. C-L: Global Health 235, 
International Comparative Studies 237
236. Ancient Science and Technology. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 364
237. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 383; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 343, Cultural Anthropology 383
237A. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 383A; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 343A, Cultural Anthropology 383A
238A. Rome: History of the City. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 340A; also C-L: Art 
History 209A
238S. History of Political Nonviolence. CCI, CZ In this seminar, we will investigate cases of peaceful 
resolutions of intractable conflicts during the 20th century as alternatives to tactics of warfare and counter-
terrorism. The focus will include the dissolution of the Soviet Union and its Eastern European subordinate 
states; the end of British rule in India, the transition from the apartheid regime in South Africa; the plebiscite 
ending the Pinochet dictatorship in Chile; the accords ending the violence in Ireland; and the successful 
nonviolent strategies of the civil rights movement in the U.S. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: Public Policy 
248S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 238S, Human Rights
239. History of Chinese Medicine. CCI, CZ, STS, W This course introduces students to the history of 
medicine through the study of medical practices and beliefs in China. Paying close attention to socio-historical 
context, we will explore how those beliefs formed, how the practices have changed over time, and in particular 
how the introduction of Western medicine and then scientific biomedicine forced fundamental changes in 
Chinese medicine over the course of the twentieth century. This course also introduces students to the discipline 
of History, and students will work in close consultation with the professor to produce a unique research paper. 
History majors should take a Gateway Seminar first, but there are no official prerequisites. Instructor: Barnes. 
One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 142, Global Health 142
239FS. Turkey: Muslim and Modern. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 
279FS; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 179FS, Islamic Studies
239S. Turkey: Muslim and Modern. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 279S; 
also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 179S
240. Greek and Roman Law. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 308; also C-L: Political Science 
381
242S. Human Rights in the Americas. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 245S; also 
C-L: Latin American Studies 246S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 245S, International 
Comparative Studies, Human Rights
244. Medieval Christianity in Film and Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 261; 
also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 354, English 254
245. Europe Before The Crusades. CCI, CZ Foundations of European politics and society from 450 to 
1000, when imperial Roman religion melded with the world of Goths, Celts and Franks, and custom and conflict 
sustained law and order. Ideas of Christian empire developed during Charlemagne’s reign and manifested in the 
violence of the First Crusade. Instructor: Malegam. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 259
247. British Isles in the Middle Ages. CCI, CZ, EI, W From the fifth through the fourteenth centuries. 
Instructor: Morrow. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 272
248. History and Culture of Iran. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
123; also C-L: Religion 283



 History (HISTORY)440

248S. Book Publishing & Marketing: A Case Study of the Romance Fiction Industry. ALP, 
CCI, CZ, W A case study of the US romance fiction industry and its global reach. The romance novel is the 
most popular form of fiction in the world. Its industry is powered by women, produces a product consumed 
by women, and exports to global audiences. Includes: its history, role in popular American culture, and rise 
to dominate the fiction market; how creative projects become commercial products; dramatic shifts in the 
book industry over three centuries, including the ebook- and self-publishing revolutions; how notions of 
gender and sexuality have shaped the aggressive and ingenious marketing of romance fiction from its origins; 
representations of race in romance fiction. Instructor: Dubois. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 248S, English 284S
249. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 208, Global Health 208, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 369
249S. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 208S, Global Health 208S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 369S
250. Green Germany: World Leader in Environmental Policy. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see German 364; also C-L: Environment 366, Energy 364
251. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Major developments in Jewish history from 
the early modern period to today. The Kehillah, the Spanish-Jewish Diaspora, the rise of Polish Jewry, the Safed 
Kabbalah, Sabbatianism, the emergence of the Chassidut, the Haskalah (Jewish Enlightenment), Emancipation 
and the nation state, Reform Judaism, economic modernization, racial antisemitism, Zionism, the Holocaust, 
the State of Israel, flourishing Jewish pluralism in the United States, the future: nation and Diaspora? 
Instructor: Hacohen. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 251, Religion 340, International Comparative Studies 253, 
Ethics Elective
252. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-
2015. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 255; also C-L: Public Policy 254, Study of Ethics 255, Ethics 
Elective, Markets and Management Studies
253. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Italian 481; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 450, Religion 262, Literature 245
254. The Expansion of Medieval Europe. CCI, CZ Lecture course follows the transformation of medieval 
politics, society and culture from the First Crusade to the Reformation. The evolution of secular monarchies 
and the flourishing of vernacular literature and devotion. The growth of commerce and an urban middle class. 
New forms of feminine religiosity and fascination with Christ’s humanity. Intensified alienation and persecution 
of marginal groups such as the Jews. Field trip to the local museum. Instructor: Malegam. One course. C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 254
255. German History Through Film. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 286; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 287, Literature 286
256S. The Viking Age. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see German 261S; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 305S
257. Religion, Reform, and Violence in Early Modern Europe. CCI, CZ The interplay of social, 
economic, and political developments in Central Europe from the eve of the Reformation to the end of the Thirty 
Years’ War, with particular attention to the links between religion, gender, and the social order. Instructor: 
Neuschel or Robisheaux. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 281, International Comparative 
Studies
258S. Women and Power in the Renaissance. CZ, EI, W Explores the intellectual, social, and political 
history of women in Renaissance Europe. Despite the overwhelmingly patriarchal nature of early modern 
society, many women wrote treatises, dialogues, and poetry in which they argued for a broader role for women. 
Students will examine these primary texts (some by famous figures, others by much less well-known writers) 
within the context of a burgeoning social history that has provided a more nuanced view of gender relations and 
power in this period. Instructor: Martin. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 248S, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 258S, Romance Studies 258S



History (HISTORY) 441

260. Magic, Religion, and Science since 1400. CCI, CZ, EI, STS The history of magic and witchcraft 
in western culture from the Renaissance to the present, with particular attention to the relationship of 
supernatural beliefs to religion and science. The renewal of magic, astrology, and alchemy in the Renaissance; 
early modern witch beliefs and the witch hunt; national skepticism in the Enlightenment; modern marginal 
sciences such as parapsychology; and adaptations of magical beliefs to modern culture in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries. Instructor: Robisheaux. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 287, Science & 
Society 260
260D. Magic, Religion, and Science since 1400. CCI, CZ, EI, STS The history of magic and witchcraft 
in western culture from the Renaissance to the present, with particular attention to the relationship of 
supernatural beliefs to religion and science. The renewal of magic, astrology, and alchemy in the Renaissance; 
early modern witch beliefs and the witch hunt; national skepticism in the Enlightenment; modern marginal 
sciences such as parapsychology; and adaptations of magical beliefs to modern culture in the nineteenth and 
twentieth centuries. Instructor: Robisheaux. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 287D
261. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 
387; also C-L: Jewish Studies 369, Literature 369, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 387, 
Human Rights
262. Roman Political Thought and Its Modern Legacy. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 278; also C-L: Study of Ethics 276, Political Science 278
263. The Political History of Modern Architecture: From Revolution through Neoliberalism. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 284; also C-L: Political Science 263, Public Policy 287
264. Latin American Wars of Independence. CCI, CZ, SS This course covers the conspiracies, uprisings, 
and wars that led to the independence of Haiti and the Latin American colonies of Spain and Portugal between 
1780 and the 1898 withdrawal of Spain from Cuba. It focuses on the key military and political leaders of anti-
colonial struggles conducted on a continental scale from the islands of the Caribbean to the Andean highlands 
and beyond. Military strategy and political tactics were decisively shaped by modern debates about the meaning 
of freedom in terms of slavery and national self-determination. No prior knowledge of Latin America and the 
Caribbean required. Instructor: French. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 264, International 
Comparative Studies 232, Political Science 257, Latin American Studies
265S. Religion and Politics in Post-Revolutionary Iran. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 
377S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 288S, Political Science 379S
266A. Germany Today: A European Superpower? Duke-in-Berlin. CCI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see 
German 359A; also C-L: Political Science 296A, International Comparative Studies
266D. Soccer Politics. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Romance Studies 362D; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 204D
267S. Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, EI, W Traditional narratives of the Cold War focus on a bi-polar series of 
conflicts that pit the United States against the Soviet Union in a good-versus-evil battle for global political and 
military supremacy. This course destabilizes this account of a process that affected every continent on earth 
– and even reached into space – over the period of more than half a century. It explores the Cold War from 
East-West, North-South, global, and interstellar perspectives. In addition to political and military issues, the 
course will also discuss the Cold War in social, cultural, intellectual, and economic spheres. Instructor: Nealy. 
One course. C-L: Russian 267S, Public Policy 267S, Sociology 267S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 267S, Study of 
Ethics 267S, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
268SA. Berlin Film City: Movies in the Metropolis. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see German 376SA; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 376SA
269. Tudor/Stuart Britain. CZ, R, W Introduction to the history and culture of sixteenth and seventeenth 
century England; the Reformation, Colonization, and the Civil war. Changes in legal cultural ideas of identity 
and authority. Instructor: Stem. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 275
270. Britain and the British Empire in the Age of the American Revolution. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, 
R Britain and the wider British world in the eighteenth century. Global warfare; empire in the Atlantic and 
India; Pacific exploration; Enlightenment thought and science; art, literature, and music; material culture; 



 History (HISTORY)442

industrial, commercial, and financial revolutions; politics and the rise of the modern state. Instructor: Stern. 
One course.
271. Modern Britain. CCI, CZ, W Introduction to British history in the modern period, eighteenth century 
through the present. Impact of industrialization and imperial expansion on political culture, social relations 
of class and gender, and national identity. Imperial comparisons and connections to the British experience. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
272. Genocide and Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Analyzes the phenomenon of genocide from an 
interdisciplinary perspective, exploring the ways that violence intersected with gender, race, and religion. 
Combines the history of genocide with the history of humanitarianism, international law, and human rights, 
seeking to understand their successes and failures. Case studies cover the twentieth century up to the present 
and may include mass violence in Armenia, the Congo, the Holocaust, Nigeria/Biafra, Cambodia, Rwanda, and 
Sudan. An interdisciplinary approach will be used, seeking to investigate genocide and human rights from the 
heights of international law to the depths of the human heart, using tools of political science, literature, and 
history. Instructor: Sharman. One course. C-L: Public Policy 345, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 272, Human Rights
273S-1. The Spanish Civil War in History and Literature. ALP, CZ, EI, FL One course. C-L: see 
Spanish 373S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 373S
275. The Russian Empire. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 356
276. From Tsars to Commissars: Russian Cultural History. CZ Medieval origins of the Imperial 
Russian state, concentrating on the period between the reign of Catherine the Great (1762-1796) and the death 
of Lenin in 1924. Emphasis on state authority, ruling elites, and the formation of the opposition revolutionary 
movement leading to the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: Russian 276, 
International Comparative Studies
277. Tolstoy and the Russian Experience. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Russian 325
278S. Nationalism and Exile. CCI, CZ, R The dilemmas confronting Russian and European exiles in the 
nineteenth and twentieth centuries in the context of nation-state identities. Focuses on political and literary 
exiles forced from their native countries. Central to the study is the role of the modern nation-state, from whose 
boundaries the exiles were expelled. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 
289S
279. The Foundations of Modern Terrorism. CCI, CZ An exploration into the problems associated with 
terrorism in the modern era. The subject will be treated historically, chronologically and thematically, with 
emphasis on the 19th and 20th centuries. We shall also be examining three main geographic areas -- Europe, 
Russia and the U. S. Comparisons will therefore be made of the different genres of terrorisms that have 
functioned in these and other localities, including Latin America and Africa. We conclude with the road to 9/11. 
Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 276, International Comparative Studies
281. Russian Revolutionary Cinema. CCI, CZ The origins and development of the revolutionary and 
experimental cinema in Russia during the last years of the Empire and after the seizure of power by the 
Bolsheviks in 1917. Films include the classics of the silent Soviet cinema directed by Eisenstein as well as other 
films by other influential directors. The transition into the Stalinist cinema of the 1930s and comparisons with 
Hollywood films of that era. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: Russian 381, Visual and Media Studies 253, 
Marxism and Society
282. End of Russian Socialism: History of Perestroika. CCI, CZ, EI, SS History of the fall of the 
Soviet Union as interplay between Russia’s economic legacy, a sequence of economic and political decisions 
undertaken by Gorbachev’s government in the 1980s, and international forces that influenced Russia’s decision 
to reform; includes exploration of principles and aspirations that informed Soviet socialist economy in theory 
and practice; traces the restructuring of Soviet economic system into its present-day capitalism a la Russe. 
Instructor: Krylova. One course. C-L: Russian 352
283S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 296S; also C-L: Literature 276S, International Comparative Studies 345S, 
Islamic Studies



History (HISTORY) 443

284. Life Within Capitalism: A History of its Values, Measures and Struggles. CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 249; also C-L: Study of Ethics 271, Economics 270, Political Science 252
285D. Western Warfare Since 1789. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS European and United States conduct of war 
since 1789, ranging from the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic wars to the current United States pursuit 
of war in the Middle East and beyond, Focus on the nature and aims of Western warfare and the practices, 
languages, and experiences of its participants. The shifting ways in which military force has been used against 
soldiers and civilians. Instructor: Bönker. One course.
286. Europe in the Twentieth Century. CCI, CZ An examination, emphasizing cultural and political 
trends, of the turning points that have shattered political unity (two world wars, economic depression, protest 
movements, the Cold War and ethnic strife), as well as forces for unification (modernist literature, film and 
music, political ideologies, the Common Market, and post-1989 revival). Instructor: Chappel. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 237
287. History of the World Wars. CZ, EI, R, STS An examination of the origins, course, and consequences 
of the world wars of twentieth century. Close attention is paid to impact of warfare on society and the ensuing 
moral and political controversies. Instructor: Bönker, Krylova, or Lentz-Smith. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 287
289S. Decolonization: Histories, Meanings, Struggles. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
International Comparative Studies 335S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 335S
290. Special Topics in History. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Jewish Studies 256; also 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 357, Religion 212, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 216, Islamic Studies
295. World War II and French Film. CCI, CZ, EI, FL One course. C-L: see French 413; also C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 310
297. The Holocaust. CCI, CZ, EI, STS Antisemitism and the Jewish question in Central Europe, the 
development of Nazi policy, the Final Solution in its different sites (ghetto, labor camps, extermination camps) 
and institutions (SS, Judenrat), the Holocaust’s legacy. Historiographical debates and documentary research. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 342, Religion 342, Political Science 262, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 297, Human Rights
299. Women and Popular Culture in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This course examines 
representations of women in popular culture in the United States. We will focus on the dramatic changes in 
the characteristics attributed to women over time; the multiple, often conflicting ideas about women that 
circulated at particular moments; and the influence of race, class, and sexuality in shaping popular conceptions 
about women. We will then consider what popular culture reveals about women’s lives: how it reflected and 
obscured the actual conditions of women’s lives; how it constrained women; and how women also used popular 
conceptions for their own ends. The course uses a variety of materials, including plays, novels, movies, images, 
and music. Instructor: Edwards. One course.
301S. Influential Scientists and Policy Leaders in Science Policy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 238S; also C-L: Public Policy 233S
302. Rise of Modern Science: Early Science through Newton. CZ, STS, W The development of science 
and medicine with attention to cultural and social influences upon science. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 289
303. Rise of Modern Science: Newton to Einstein. CZ, STS, W See History 302. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Science & Society 303
304. Rise of Modern Science: Twentieth Century. CZ, STS, W See History 302. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
305. History of International Financial and Monetary Crises. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Economics 305; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 305
306. Introduction to Economic History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 302; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 303



 History (HISTORY)444

307. History of Economic Thought. CCI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Economics 311; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies, Marxism and Society
308S. Adam Smith and the System of Natural Liberty. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Economics 312S; 
also C-L: Philosophy 312S
309. Alexander Hamilton and His World. CCI, CZ Using the musical “Hamilton” as a starting point and 
a foil, this course examines Alexander Hamilton’s life, work, and impact in the context of his rapidly changing 
world. The course addresses some of the central issues tied to Hamilton’s life and career in both the Caribbean 
and the English colonies of North America: class and social mobility, the origins and character of the American 
Revolution, gender relations and ideas in the new republic, plantation slavery and controversies about it, 
the problems of unity and nation-building, the development of a US economy and financial system, party 
competition and democratic mobilization, the United States’ relationship to world powers. Instructor: Huston. 
One course.
309S. The History of Modern Macroeconomics from Keynes to the Present. SS, W One course. C-L: 
see Economics 314S
310. The International Economy, 1850-Present: From Globalization to Globalization. CCI, CZ, 
SS One course. C-L: see Economics 304; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 304
311S. Men, Women, and Sports: Topics in US Sports History. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Examines the way 
sports have been tied to and expressed ideals of manhood and womanhood, race, class, and nation. Topics will 
vary but include boxing, Title IX, football, Olympics, baseball, etc. Instructor: Deutsch. One course.
312. Europe’s Colonial Encounter, 1492-1992: Political Economy and International Thought. 
CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W The impact of colonial expansion on European economic development, political culture, 
international thought, and popular identity from the “age of discovery” through the present. Particular attention 
to the ethical implications of colonialism’s influence on Western “civilization.” Instructor: Bartlett. One course. 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 312, Ethics Elective
313. Crime and the City from Dickens to The Wire. ALP, CCI, EI, SS Compares representation of crime 
and the city in two key “texts”: Charles Dickens’s “Oliver Twist” and the HBO television series, “The Wire.” 
Juxtaposes the social and political contexts to which each text refers, paying particular attention to the nature 
and causes of criminal activity therein. Explanations emphasizing individual or personal responsibility will be 
contrasted to those that take structural factors into account, including urban housing, public health, child labor, 
public education, poverty and its relief, urban governance, as well as the criminal justice system. Instructor: 
Thorne. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 226
313D. Crime and the City from Dickens to The Wire. ALP, CCI, EI, SS Compares representation of 
crime and the city in two key “texts”: Charles Dickens’s “Oliver Twist” and HBO television series, “The Wire”. 
Juxtaposes social and political contexts to which each text refers, paying particular attention to nature and 
causes of criminal activity therein. Explanations emphasizing individual or personal responsibility will be 
contrasted to those that take structural factors into account, including urban housing, public health, child labor, 
public education, poverty and its relief, urban governance, as well as the criminal justice system. Instructor: 
Thorne. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 226D, International Comparative Studies 313D
314S. US Latin@ Histories. CCI, EI, SS, W Content will vary, reflecting the diverse origins and experience 
of Latin@s in the US. Topics include geopolitics, media depictions, self-depictions, government policies, 
population flows, community formation and markets. Instructor: Deutsch. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in 
the Global South 314S
315S. The Emergence of the Atlantic Basin. CCI, CZ The forces unleashed by the expansion of European 
influence into the Atlantic Islands along the west and southwest coast of Africa, and across the Atlantic Ocean 
into the Americas. Instructor: Gaspar. One course.
316S. The Atlantic Slave Trade. CCI, CZ, R The development of the slave trade from the fifteenth 
century to its abolition in the nineteenth century; organization and mechanics, impact on Europe, Africa, and 
the Americas. Instructor: Gaspar. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 217S, International 
Comparative Studies 209S, Latin American Studies
317. Ethics and Native American: American Indian Life and Literature. CCI, CZ, EI One course. 



History (HISTORY) 445

C-L: see Study of Ethics 319; also C-L: Literature 319
318. The Caribbean, 1492-1700. CCI, CZ The Caribbean region from the arrival of Columbus (1492) to the 
emergence of sugar and slavery as powerful shapers of society and culture, by 1700. Instructor: Gaspar. One 
course. C-L: African & African American Studies 218, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 255, International 
Comparative Studies, Latin American Studies
319. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800. CCI, CZ The development of 
Caribbean society and economy in the contexts of slavery, empire, international rivalry, and democratic 
revolution. Instructor: Gaspar. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 219, International 
Comparative Studies 263, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219, Latin American Studies, 
Human Rights
320S. Slave Society in Colonial Anglo-America: The West Indies, South Carolina, and Virginia. 
CCI, CZ, R The development of slave-based societies and the production of staple crops for export. Instructor: 
Gaspar. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 215S, International Comparative Studies
321. The Modern Caribbean after Emancipation. CCI, CZ Focus on the Caribbean region as it 
transitioned from a collection of slave and colonial societies into a region of postcolonial and independent 
nations. Topics may include: postemancipation political and cultural struggles, pan-Africanism and 
Rastafarianism, nationalist and anticolonial movements, American economic and political influence in the 
region, Caribbean emigration to Europe and the United States, and global spread of Caribbean culture. 
Instructors: L. Dubois or Gaspar. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 240, Romance Studies 
321, Cultural Anthropology 322, International Comparative Studies 319
324. Mexico Since Before Cortes. CCI, CZ Survey of Mexican history since before the encounter between 
European and native peoples, the experience of conquest, independence rebellions, liberal reforms, revolution, 
and modernization. Instructor: Goldin. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies 223, Latin American Studies
325. Denial, Faith, Reason: Sustainability and Survival. EI One course. C-L: see Public Policy 284; also 
C-L: Study of Ethics 285, Economics 285, Environment 276, Sustainability Engagement 276
326. Colonial Latin America. CCI, CZ The pre-Columbian cultures, European conquest and its effects on 
the Amerindian peoples, and development of the Spanish and Portuguese Empires to the wars of independence 
with special emphasis upon colonial institutions and socioeconomic developments. Not open to students 
who have taken History 174. Instructor: Sigal. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 326, Latin 
American Studies
327. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History. CCI, CZ, R Slavery and the post-emancipation trajectory 
of Afro-Brazilians in a racist society that officially proclaims itself a “racial democracy.” Comparisons drawn 
with the Afro-American experience elsewhere in Latin America and the United States. Instructor: French. 
One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 209, Portuguese 260, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 327, Latin American Studies, Human Rights
328. Global Brazil. CCI, CZ, SS Analysis of Brazilian history and culture from 1500 to the present in 
transnational context, with an emphasis on themes like slavery and race, regional cleavages, authoritarian rule, 
social inequality, and innovative attempts to expand democracy. Facilitates broad-based knowledge of a country 
of increasing global economic and diplomatic clout. Close examination of primary sources, including texts, 
images, music, and film. Instructor: French. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 213, Latin 
American Studies 328, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 328, Human Rights
329. Latin America Since Independence. CCI, CZ A survey of nineteenth- and twentieth-century 
economic, social, and cultural change. Instructor: French or Olcott. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 329, Latin American Studies
331A. The Economic and Political History of the European Union. CCI, CZ, FL, SS One course. C-L: 
see French 351A; also C-L: Political Science 325A, Public Policy 351A, Economics 330A
331S. Illiberal Nondemocracies: Focus on Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 388S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 346S, Political Science 301S, 
Public Policy 317S
333S. Social Engineering and Social Movements in Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 



 History (HISTORY)446

course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 375S; also C-L: Political Science 359S, Public Policy 282S
334A. Frontier City Berlin: Facing History’s Great Challenges. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see German 
366A; also C-L: Public Policy 210A, Political Science 260A
334S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 347S; also C-L: Education 347S, Sociology 324S, Public Policy 350S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 347S, Human Rights
335. United States Legal History. CCI, CZ, R, SS Law and society in the United States from the 
American Revolution to the present. Changing institutional structures of the American legal system, popular 
understandings of legal authority, and the social uses of law. Includes such topics as property, crime, and legal 
personhood; the law’s impact on social identity and access to power; the consequences of economic and social 
transformations for America’s legal order. Instructors: Staff. One course.
336. North America to 1760. CCI, CZ, SS Early oceanic explorations, European invasion of North America, 
the evolution of race slavery, and the responses of the native American peoples. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: International Comparative Studies
337. The Era of the American Revolution, 1760-1815. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Origins, evolution, and 
consequences. Attention to economic, social, and geographical questions, as well as military, political, and moral 
issues. Instructor: Hart. One course.
338. The New Nation: The United States, 1800 to 1860. CZ, SS Examines the transformation of the 
new republic into a nation, focusing on the development of political institutions, the market economy, western 
expansion, and conflicts over slavery and the meaning of “freedom” for a wide range of people in the new nation. 
Instructor: Hart or Huston. One course.
339S. Race in Durham. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 341S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 332S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 336S, Human Rights
340. The Civil War and Reconstruction: The United States, 1850-1880. CZ, SS The social, economic, 
and cultural aspects of the Civil War’s origins and outcomes as well as the resulting military, political, and legal 
conflicts. Focus on the contested and changing meanings of “freedom” in all sections of the country. Instructor: 
Glymph. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 342
340T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling. 
ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 347T; also C-L: Public Policy 340T, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 346T, Human Rights
341S. Africa before Colonialism. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 317S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 221S
342. The Making of Modern America: The United States from 1898 to 1945. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Transformations in society, politics, foreign relations, and arts and literature between Spanish-American 
War and World War II. Course pays particular attention to domestic politics in the Progressive Era; the Great 
Migration and the “New Negro: the Jazz Age and the “Modern Woman;” the Great Depression; and the World 
Wars. Instructor: Deutsch or Lentz-Smith. One course.
343. History of Modern America: The United States from 1930 to present. CZ, SS United States 
history since the Great Depression, with emphasis on the shaping influence of the New Deal and war. Examines 
transformations of everyday life and culture and the movements for social change they generated, including 
the labor, civil rights, and women’s movements, and explores the nation’s dominant role on the world stage 
and the impact of a global economy. Instructor: MacLean. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 343, Public Policy 342, Human Rights
344. History of U.S. Social Movements. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Examines the social movements that have 
shaped U.S. history, starting with the American Revolution itself and covering others including the anti-slavery 
movement, women’s rights, Populism, Socialism, the Ku Klux Klan, the labor movement, the Black Freedom 
Movement and broader New Left, lesbian and gay liberation, and the recent conservative movement, focusing 
on the ethical issues arguments they raised, and how new civil, political, and social rights were created through 
social movement organizing. Lectures and readings explore why these movements arose, what they achieved, 
why many opposed them, and what we can learn about American history writ large from their experiences. 



History (HISTORY) 447

Instructor: MacLean. One course. C-L: Public Policy 344, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 344, Human Rights
345. North American Environmental History. CZ, EI, STS Historical roles of nature—as a cultural 
construct and a set of biological relationships—in shaping human choices in North America, from colonial 
times to the present. Special attention to historical origins of contemporary environmental politics, including 
the origins of wilderness; environmental justice movements; the changing politics of food, animal rights, and 
pollution; and tragedies of the commons, and the ethical challenges posed by global warming and population 
growth. Instructor: Peck. One course. C-L: Public Policy 278, International Comparative Studies 340
346S. Politics of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 386S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 386S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 386S, 
Public Policy 383S
347. African Americans Since the Civil War. CCI, CZ, EI Post-slavery black life and thought, as well 
as race relations and social change, during Reconstruction, Jim Crow, the Civil Rights and Black Power 
Movements, and contemporary times; ethical concepts and issues on human justice in the course of struggles for 
democracy, tolerance, and equality. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 207, 
International Comparative Studies, Documentary Studies
348. The Civil Rights Movement. CCI, CZ, EI, SS An interdisciplinary examination of the civil rights 
movement from World War II through the late 1960s. Instructor: Lentz-Smith. One course. C-L: African & 
African American Studies 243, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 348, Ethics Elective, 
Human Rights
349. African American Women and History. CCI, CZ The history of African American women in the 
United States. The production of discourses of gender, race, and class discrimination that evolved specifically 
to confront the presence of African American women first as slaves and later as free women. The ways in 
which prevalent ideas about race, race relations, and gender coalesced around images of the African American 
women and African American women’s struggles to assert independent identities. Multidisciplinary readings. 
Instructor: Glymph. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 310, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 237, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 310, Human Rights
350S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials. 
ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 346S; also C-L: Public Policy 347S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 346S, Human Rights
351S. Islam in the Americas. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 384S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 274S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 230S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 374S, Islamic Studies, Human Rights
352. Immigrant Dreams, U.S. Realities: Immigration Policy History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Immigrants 
and immigration policy in the United States from 1850 to the present, with focus on origins and power of 
immigrant exclusion during three waves of migration: Northern European and Asian migrations between 
1850 and 1880, Eastern European, Latin American, and Asian migrations, 1880-1920, and Latin American, 
African, and Asian migrations, post 1965. Immigrant roles in shaping policy debates, citizenship rights, labor 
movements, and American culture, past and present. Instructor: Peck. One course. C-L: Public Policy 220, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 352, Human Rights
353A. From Transition to Indignation: Social Movements in Spain 1977-2013. CCI, EI, FL, SS One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 342A; also C-L: Sociology 346A
354S. Native American Women in History, Society, and Art. CCI, CZ This course will explore the 
images and realities of Native American women in the history of North America from the pre-Columbian period 
through the present-day United States. We will concentrate on particular topics including: contrasting ideas of 
kinship, society, and gender egalitarianism; ways in which gender provided a language for the colonialism of 
European empires and the US nation-state; experiences of Native women as mediators of cultural exchange and 
as victims of cross-cultural conflict; and the role of gender in the creation of hierarchies of identity, race, and 
power. Instructor: Barr. One course.
355. American Indian History to 1815. CCI, CZ Examines images and realities of North American Indian 



 History (HISTORY)448

cultures and history from the pre-Columbian period, through the period of European-Indian contact in the 
16th, 17th, & 18th centuries, to the first imperial expansion of the new U.S. nation in the 1810s. Constructions 
of cultural identity; diplomacy and warfare between Indian nations and European invaders; trade, exchange 
networks, and Indian political economies; dynamics of cultural change, stability, and transformation as 
American Indians responded to and resisted Euro-American attempts at religious and cultural conversion, and 
political and economic conquest. Instructor: Barr. One course.
356S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom 
Struggle. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 320S; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 231S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 320S, Human Rights
357S. The Insurgent South: Movements for Social Change. CZ, SS Social movements in the South 
from Reconstruction to the present. Includes Populism, Women’s Suffrage, the Interracial Movement, labor, 
civil rights, post-1960s conservatism, environmental justice, and LGBTQ activism. Attention to public policy 
positions espoused by social movement organizations and activists. Instructor: MacLean. One course. C-L: 
Public Policy 232S
358. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 326; also 
C-L: African & African American Studies 230, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 326, 
Human Rights
358S. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 326S; also 
C-L: African & African American Studies 230S
359. Violent Jihad in the Twentieth Century - A Global History. CCI, CZ This course focuses on 
the history of Muslim groups and social movements which are often regarded as politically fundamentalists 
or radical in the twentieth-century Middle East. We shall critically survey the intellectual origins of radical 
ideologies, the social history of the “Muslim Brotherhood” in Egypt and Syria, the politics of Saudi Arabia, the 
rise of Hizbullah, the question of the caliphate, the interaction between foreign intervention and the approval 
of violence as a legitimate means in politics, a history of al-Qaeda, and finally of what we know about ISIS. 
Instructor: Mestyan. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 359, Political Science 382, Public Policy 
359, International Comparative Studies 361
360S. Writing American Politics. CZ, EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 276S; also 
C-L: African & African American Studies 233S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 226S
361. United States Political History, 1789-1900. CZ, SS The development of American politics between 
the end of the Revolution and 1900. The extension and limitations of democracy; the emergence and extension 
of parties as the central institution of politics; the relationship between popular political initiatives and party 
politics; the clash and transformation of party policies and ideologies; and the growth and transformation of the 
American state. Instructor: Huston. One course.
362. United States Political History, 1900 to the Present. CZ, SS U.S. political history from 1900 
to the present. Topics include the emergence, evolution, and decline of a “liberal” coalition; the creation of a 
“conservative” coalition; the development of a powerful federal state and its social and political results; the role 
of money in politics; the transformation of voting rights and voter participation; reform and radical movements 
and their relationship to party politics and the federal government. Instructor: Huston. One course.
363. History of Capitalism in the United States. EI, SS, W Surveys history of various forms of capitalism 
in the United States, with focus on changing labor systems and labor relations, banking and finance, business 
enterprise and strategies, agriculture, government economic policy (including regulatory policy), and intellectual 
history of capitalism and its reformers. Instructor: Huston. One course. C-L: Marxism and Society
364D. American Business History. CCI, CZ, R, W The historical development of business in the United 
States during the nineteenth and twentieth centuries. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 222D, 
Markets and Management Studies
365. Inventing Sickness: The Science and Practice of Medicine in Ancient Greece. CZ, EI, SS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 366
365D. The Modern Regulatory State. CZ, EI, R, SS Interdisciplinary inquiry into the origins/evolution of 
modern regulatory institutions in Western Europe and North America, along with the more recent rise of global 



History (HISTORY) 449

regulatory bodies. Examines conceptual frameworks from across the social sciences, and considers the ethical 
dimensions of current debates over regulatory purposes, strategies, and policies in areas such as finance and the 
environment. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 219D, Environment 365D, Political Science 340D
367. The History of the Book. ALP, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 360; also C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 346, Information Science + Studies 360
368S. Istanbul and Berlin. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 383S; also 
C-L: German 283S, International Comparative Studies 356S
369. History of Public Health in America. CZ, R, STS The role of epidemic diseases such as smallpox, 
cholera, yellow fever, tuberculosis, and polio in shaping public health policy in the United States from the 
colonial era to World War II. Instructor: Humphreys. One course. C-L: Science & Society 369
370. Aztecs and Mayans. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Within modern imaginaries, Aztecs and Mayans become 
seen as those who engaged in brutal sacrifice and cannibalism atop their great temples. In order to question 
this pornographic assumption, this course examines the sources--art available at the Nasher Museum and 
many visual sources and written texts from the times of the Classic Maya civilization through today. We will 
collectively think about the ways in which these peoples have lived their lives and responded to the challenges of 
colonialism and globalization. Students should expect a hands on course as they will examine everything from 
ancient pottery to weapons, paintings, photographs, films, and written documents. Instructor: Sigal. One course.
371. Feast and Famine: Food in Global History. CCI, CZ, SS, STS Surveys history of food in global 
history, beginning with paleolithic and ending with modern era. Focuses on food quality and quantity as a 
factor in determining health, including problems of global health disparities, food insecurity, and obesity. 
Topics include the impact of food exchanges across continents and cultures, discovery of vitamins and vitamin 
deficiencies, growth and impact of food industries, and the rise of diseases of plenty, such as type 2 diabetes. 
Instructors: Humphreys. One course. C-L: Science & Society 371
372. France and Africa: The Politics and Culture of (Post-)Coloniality. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 380; also C-L: Romance Studies 380, International Comparative Studies 
364
373. American Indian History Since 1806. CCI, CZ Examines images and realities of North American 
Indian cultures and history from early 19th century through present day. Focus on American Indian responses 
to Anglo-American nation building and encroachment, radical decline of Indian populations over the 19th 
century and complex survival strategies initiated by American Indians in the face of decimation, Anglo-
American attempts at religious and cultural conversion; and Indian response and resistance, and demographic 
and political revitalization of Indian peoples in the 20th century. Instructor: Barr. One course.
374. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Major questions relating to 
women and women’s place in society over the course of U.S. history, broadly defined, from the colonial period to 
the present: How did different groups of women see themselves as women? How did views of women’s sexuality 
change? How did men’s and women’s relationships and roles change? How did women understand their 
connections to the larger society? How did race, ethnicity, and class shape all those issues? Course uses a variety 
of materials, including novels, movies, images, and music to explore the ethical contours of women’s lives in the 
past, following change over time to better understand women’s position today. Instructor: Edwards or Deutsch. 
One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 239, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
374D. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Major questions relating to 
women and women’s place in society over the course of U.S. history, broadly defined, from the colonial period to 
the present: How did different groups of women see themselves as women? How did views of women’s sexuality 
change? How did men’s and women’s relationships and roles change? How did women understand their 
connections to the larger society? How did race, ethnicity, and class shape all those issues? Course uses a variety 
of materials, including novels, movies, images, and music to explore the ethical contours of women’s lives in the 
past, following change over time to better understand women’s position today. Instructor: Edwards, Deutsch. 
One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 239D, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 239D, Human Rights
375. United States Foreign Policy I: From World War II to Vietnam War. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Public Policy 205



 History (HISTORY)450

376. United States Foreign Policy II: From Vietnam War to the Present. CCI, CZ, SS One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 206
377. Global History of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Studies human sexual behavior, classification, and 
regulation around the world from roughly 2000 BCE to present. Investigates moral and ethical norms regarding 
sex and sexuality within a wide variety of cultural and historical contexts, including ancient Near East, Greek 
and Roman empires, Byzantine Empire, China/Japan, pre-Columbian America, early modern Europe, colonial 
America/Africa/India, Victorian England, and modern US, Europe, Latin America, Asia, and Africa. Emphasizes 
constructed nature of sexuality, diversity of sexual behaviors across time and space, and effects of colonialism 
and globalization on local understandings of sexuality. Instructor: Sigal. One course. C-L: Study of Sexualities 
377
378SA. Politics and Culture Between Europe and the Middle East. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 381SA; also C-L: Public Policy 386SA, International Comparative Studies 225SA
379S. Geopolitics and Culture: Islamic States from the Ottomans to ISIS. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 208S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 217S, Public Policy 
213S
380S. Islamic Mysticism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 373S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 380S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 373S, Study of Ethics 373S, Islamic Studies
381S. Veterans Oral History Project. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 317S; also C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 317S, Human Rights
382S. Digital Durham. ALP, R, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 356S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 358S, Education 356S
383. Engineering the Global Middle East. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS This class is a global techno-
environmental history, with a special emphasis on the modern Middle East. We will interrogate the many ways 
in which the transformation of nature and transfer of technologies has rearranged political relations within and 
between states in the last two hundred years. We shall survey the social history of technology, of engineering, 
infrastructural developments, urbanization, and energy resources. Students in this course will learn how to do 
research through the lenses of environmental history and science and technology studies using the methods of 
microhistory. Instructor: Mestyan. One course. C-L: Energy 383, Energy and the Environment
384. The People’s Republic of China, 1949-Present. CCI, CZ, SS This course begins its examination of 
the People’s Republic of China (PRC) and the Communist Party of China (CPC) through multifaceted analyses of 
the first Party Chairman, Mao Zedong ¿¿¿/¿¿¿. We will first allow ourselves to be seduced by the richly detailed 
accounts of this fascinating man. We will then take a step back to observe that, in order to understand Mao, 
we must understand the society and culture in which he lived. This movement from Mao to the masses gives 
shape to the fundamental question of this class: what is the relationship between the individual and the social 
collective? Students are encouraged, but not required, to take History 223 as prerequisite. Instructor: Barnes. 
One course.
385S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see African 
& African American Studies 347S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 305S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 305S, Human Rights
386S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 316S; also C-L: Public Policy 327S, Political Science 337S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 316S, Human Rights
387S. Francophone Literature. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 417S; also C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 202S, Latin American Studies
388S. The Scientific Revolution. CZ, STS, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 380S; also C-L: Science & 
Society 380S
389S. Family Rights/Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Explores relationship between state, family 
formation, and individuals. Surveys regulation of sexuality, reproduction, adoption, immigration, and 
incarceration with focus mainly on U.S. and past 200 years. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Deutsch. 



History (HISTORY) 451

One course. C-L: Public Policy 346S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 389S, Latino/a 
Studies in the Global South, Human Rights
390. Topics in History Lecture. Individual courses in this series may be taught more than once or on a one-
time basis only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in History. Register for course by designated 
suffix indicating the specific country. Courses numbered 390A-01 thru 390A-14 are lecture courses taught in 
Duke-administered study-abroad programs, for example, in Germany, Italy, France, China. These courses 
provide the same credit and fulfill the same curriculum requirements as any 200-300 level lecture course in the 
history department. One course.
390A-01. Duke in Madrid: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-02. Duke in China: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-03. Duke in France: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-04. Duke in Andes: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-05. Duke in Italy: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-06. Duke in Russia: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-07. Duke in Australia: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-08. Duke in Berlin: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-09. Duke in Oxford: Special Topics on History. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
390A-10. Duke in Istanbul: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-11. Duke in Vienna: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-12. Duke in Venice: Special Topics on History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-13. Duke in South Africa: Special Topics in History. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-14. Duke in Turkey: Special Topics. One course.
390AS. Study Abroad: Seminar on Historical Topics. Register for country by the section designated in 
the Official Schedule of Courses. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Topics in History Seminar. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Topics in Digital History and Humanities. Digital History and Digital Humanities in theory 
and practice. Students plan, research and develop new technology projects which present archival material and 
historical interpretations to scholars and the general public through research papers, websites, and museum 
exhibits. The course meets weekly to discuss readings in American history, southern history, and digital history/
humanities. Students explore archival material in the Rubinstein Library, learn how to use digital tools for 
humanities projects, develop principles of effective digital project management, create cross-disciplinary 
collaborations and learn about the ethics for creating research projects in the humanities. Instructor: Abel/
Szabo. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 390S-1, Visual and Media Studies 390S-1
391. Independent Study. Fall semester directed-readings independent study. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. Spring semester directed-readings independent study. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Fall semester research independent study. Usually undertaken 
by students concurrently with the Honors Seminar, or with an instructor with whom they have had a course. 
Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of 
which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously 
approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393A. Research Independent Study on Contemporary China. R Research and field studies culminating 
in a paper approved and supervised by the resident director of the Duke in China program. Includes field trips 



 History (HISTORY)452

on cultural and societal changes in contemporary China. Offered only in the Duke in China Program. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R Spring semester research independent study. See History 393. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395S. Post-1945 America. CCI, CZ, R, W After providing an orientation to post-1945 US history, this 
course will guide students in the production of original individual research papers that aim for publishable 
quality. Students will choose topics according to their own interests that make use of the rich collections of 
primary sources in Duke’s Rubenstein Library. Sample areas for more defined projects include the history 
of advertising, the civil rights and Black Power movements, labor organizing, women’s history, alternative 
publishing, LGBTQ history, aspects of US relations with the wider world, environmentalism, economic thought, 
and the impact of globalization, particularly on North Carolina and the South. Some prior college coursework in 
20th century US history desirable but not required. Instructor: MacLean. One course. C-L: Public Policy 360S
396S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 346S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 351S, Political 
Science 336S, Public Policy 326S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 349S, Human Rights
397S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
283S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 283S, International Comparative Studies 249S, Islamic Studies
398S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 366S; also C-L: Public Policy 388S, Visual Arts 366S, Visual and Media Studies 368S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 366S, Human Rights
399A. Duke Summer Program: Oxford. CCI, SS Two courses. C-L: see Political Science 282A; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
403S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 403S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
403S, Human Rights
404. Women and the Law in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This course not only explores the legal status 
of women in the United States, but also considers broader questions about both the history of women history 
and the dynamics of law. Challenging the usual narrative, which emphasizes the acquisition of rights over time, 
the course focuses on the women’s changing relationship to the law over time and consider the various ways that 
women used and even reshaped the law, even in periods when they could not claim rights in their own names. 
We will use legal records from the colonial period to the present, along with a variety of other sources and 
readings. Instructor: Edwards. One course.
405. What Machiavelli Really Says. ALP, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 483; also C-L: Literature 
483, Political Science 483, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 473
407. Soviet and Post-Soviet Economic History. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Economics 407; also 
C-L: Russian 407
411S. Historicizing Whiteness. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 411S; also C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 411S, Human Rights
414S. Research in Human Rights. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 414S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 414S
417S. Critical Interventions in Middle East Studies and Policy. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 479S; also C-L: Public Policy 417S, International Comparative Studies 408S, 
Literature 417S, International Comparative Studies
420. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, R One course. C-L: see French 411; also 
C-L: Literature 420
444. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 325; also C-L: Religion 372, Islamic Studies
448S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics and Poetics of Knowledge Production. CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 476S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 411S, 



History (HISTORY) 453

Literature 476S, Visual and Media Studies 476S, Documentary Studies 476S
450S. South African Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 406S; also C-L: Political Science 406S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 406S, 
Public Policy 406S, Cultural Anthropology 406S
452S. World War I and the History of Art & Architecture: Germany and Beyond. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 460S; also C-L: German 460S
454S. Capstone Seminar - Globalization: Asia and Asian America. CCI, CZ, R, SS, 
STS ”Globalization”: a shorthand for describing the period of extraordinary change that we are living through, 
our lives, and our worlds as defined by global connections, from the internet technologies and rapid mass 
communication to issues of mobilization for social justice. This course focuses on two main themes: global 
moments of common struggle against racism in Asian, Asian American, and African American contexts, and 
global manufacture and the ways in which the microprocessor chip technology has come to bind Asia, Africa, 
and America, with a special focus on women and Asian Americans in the IT sector. Instructor: Mazumdar. 
One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 407S, International Comparative Studies 412S, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 412S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 437S
456S. Capstone Seminar: Intercolonial Relations in British America, 1600-1763. CCI, CZ, 
R Explores the development of patterns of relations among British colonies in North America and the Caribbean 
and how these shaped a wider interconnected but differentiated colonial world. Discussion is framed against 
background of the formal framework of relations between Britain and her colonies. Themes to be explored 
include migration, trade, travel, the slave trade, slavery, communications, war, legal borrowing, maritime 
environment, cultural exchange, natural disaster. Instructor: Gaspar. One course.
457S. Capstone Seminar: Maroon Societies in America. CCI, CZ, R Origins and development of 
fugitive slave communities throughout the Americas from the sixteenth to the nineteenth century. Major focus is 
on their role in the operation of slave society. Instructor: Gaspar. One course.
460S. Capstone Seminar: The Black Death and Medieval Society. CCI, CZ, EI, R Source-based 
discussion seminar revolving around questions of social response to bubonic plague in the middle of the 
fourteenth century. Focus is England but students also read religious and literary texts from other parts of the 
medieval and late antique world. Exploration of how societies respond to catastrophe and what panic means in 
terms of communities and institutions. To what resources did people turn? What does this tell us about society 
in the Late Middle Ages? Comparison of medieval texts that assign causation and blame in conjunction with 
discourses of disease and catastrophe in the twentieth century. Instructor: Malegam. One course. C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 429S, Global Health 460S
461S. Capstone Seminar: Clothing and U.S. History. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Examines U.S. history through 
the lens of clothing, providing insight into style, individual identity, and cultural change. Also addresses a broad 
range of other issues, including property, international relations, economic change, trade, technology, and labor. 
Instructor: Edwards. One course.
462S. Capstone Seminar: Heresy and Inquisition in the Middle Ages. CCI, CZ, R, W Source-based 
discussion seminar. Inquiry into the content and context of religious deviation and its repression in western 
Christianity between 300 and 1500 but focusing on the medieval period. Emphasizes the fine line between 
religious evolution and heresy. Examines questions of coercion, social and religious reform, pre-modern 
state control and early demonology. Students engage in close reading of selected primary sources. Instructor: 
Malegam. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 430S
463S. Capstone Seminar: Medieval Communities. CCI, CZ, EI, R Explore meaning of community 
in medieval period by studying a variety of living groups that emerged in Europe c. 800-1400. Examine roles 
of work and religion in creating communities, i.e. manorial, monastic, merchant, Islamic, Jewish, urban, and 
university communities, using primary and secondary sources. Instructor: Morrow. One course. C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 432S
464S. Capstone Seminar: Geopolitics of War and Empire in the Modern World. CZ, R, SS, W This 
course examines the pursuit of military force, war, and empire and the making of global politics in the past two 
centuries. Our explorations range from the wars of nation, industry, and empire in the mid-nineteenth century 
to the world wars of the twentieth century and their legacy. We will pay special attention to the strategies of 



 History (HISTORY)454

global ordering that were pursued by the political, military, and corporate elites of the major powers in an age of 
empire and globalization. Instructor: Bonker. One course.
465S. Capstone Seminar: History of the U.S./Mexico Border, 18th to 20th Centuries. CCI, CZ, 
R, SS, W Explores the creation and perpetual remaking of the border between the U.S. and Mexico from the 
1780s to the current day. Topics explored include nation formation, citizenship and migration, public policy, 
border incursions, and national identity. Students will examine works of history and autobiography as well as 
government hearings and other primary sources. Instructor: Deutsch. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 465S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
467S. Capstone Seminar: Russia-USSR-Russia: History of Communism. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS The 
seminar offers an in-depth engagement with Russian modern history. Starting in the late 19th century, 
the seminar examines the formation of Russian Communist movement and communist regime as national 
and transnational phenomena of the 20th Century. A comparative perceptive allows students to analyze 
Russian appropriations of Marxist theory, the Russian Revolution, the making of the Stalinist state, de-
Stalinization of the post-World War II period in the context of European and US labor movements and socialist 
experimentations, on the one hand, and anti-Communist sentiments and Cold War politics, on the other, 
while engaging with ethical issues raised by conflicting perspectives on the value and meaning of freedom and 
happiness and the means of achieving it. Instructor: Krylova. One course. C-L: Political Science 445S, Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 420S
468S. Capstone Seminar: Literature & Terrorism. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R Explores the manner in which 
terrorism has been depicted in literature. Emphasis on novels written primarily by Russian writers in the 19th 
and early 20th centuries when that country experienced waves of political violence unmatched elsewhere in the 
Western world and writers sought to grapple with the meaning of the violence in vivid and imaginative ways. 
Readings include: “The Secret Agent” by Joseph Conrad, “The Devils” by Fedor Dostoevsky, “Mother” by Maxim 
Gorky, and “Petersburg” by Andrei Belyi. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 468S
470S. Capstone Seminar: Leadership in American History. CZ, EI, R Focuses on political, social, 
business and artistic leaders in American history and problems that have called for leadership. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Wilson. One course.
471S. Capstone Seminar: Latin American Left Turns: A New Politics for the 21st Century?. CCI, 
CZ, R, SS, W Examination of issues surrounding the upsurge of leftist governments elected by the popular 
vote in the wake of the perceived failures of neoliberalism and the Washington consensus of 1989. Looks at 
ways Washington has had to come to terms with an unexpected revival on the left that threatens U.S. hegemony 
while offering an alternative path to achieve national development, distribution of wealth, and recognition of 
diversity and pluralism. Students will examine these issues from multiple viewpoints and develop projects based 
on choosing specific research foci within the general enterprise of what these government share in common and 
how they differ. Instructor: French. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies 471S, Political Science 497S
472S. Capstone Seminar: Russia in World War II. CCI, CZ, R, SS Nowhere else was World War II 
as bloody and destructive as it was in Eastern Europe, and of all nations it was the Soviet Union that paid the 
highest price for victory. The scale of death and destruction is hard to comprehend even today. How Soviet 
society, its economy and military prepared for the upcoming war, mobilized and persevered during the conflict, 
and ended up storming Berlin in 1945 is explored in this course. Questions of socialist economy at war, 
technological innovation, and gender dimensions of modern war and warfare form core topics of the course. 
Instructor: Krylova. One course.
473. Two Koreas: History, Society and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 372; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 473
474S. Capstone Seminar - Madness and Society in Historical Perspective. CCI, R, SS Mental 
illness and psychiatric treatment from antiquity to the present with special concentration on the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries in Europe, America, and Russia. Not open to students who have taken History 265. 
Instructor: Miller. One course.
476S. Capstone Seminar: American Militarism. CZ, EI, R, SS, W Explores the debate over U.S. 
militarism in past and present. Fears of an American militarism have haunted public debate and policy-making, 
shaping the nation’s pursuits of war, military force, and global empire. Focusing on moments of intense debate, 



History (HISTORY) 455

we will pay close attention to how the term militarism functioned as an indispensable part of the U.S. political 
lexicon since the 1890s. Instructor: Bonker. One course.
478S. Capstone Seminar: Race and Power in World History. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Explores how ideas 
and practices defined by “racial difference” have driven world history. Much of what we know, or think we 
know, about race is derived from our particular history and experience in the United States. But American ideas 
about race, and American history of racial hierarchy, represent one of many configurations of race around the 
world. By thinking about race comparatively, and by focusing on how race has worked in a variety of historical 
and geographical contexts, we will be able to assess the importance of race in creating the world we live in. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
479S. Capstone Seminar: Russia’s Path to Capitalism. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W History of the end of the 
Soviet Union as interplay between Russia’s economic legacy, a sequence of economic and political reforms under 
Gorbachev, and international forces; includes exploration of principles and aspirations that informed Soviet 
socialist economy in theory and practice; differences between ‘planned economy,’ one associates with the Soviet 
Union and ‘regulated economy,’ one finds in the West; traces the restructuring of the Soviet economic system 
into its present-day capitalism with a particular focus on reform paths not taken. Instructor: Krylova. One 
course.
480S. Capstone Seminars in Classical Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 480S; also C-L: Political Science 480S
481S. Capstone Seminar: The Age of Jim Crow: Racial Segregation from Plessy (1896) to Brown 
(1954). CZ, EI, R, W The emergence, nature, and consequences of racial segregation (also known as Jim 
Crow) in the South and nation; how Jim Crow compares to the system of apartheid in South Africa; perspectives 
on black life and race relations in southern communities; and major challenges to Jim Crow by African 
American religious, social, and civil rights organizations and their allies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 409S
482S. Capstone Seminar: Post-Civil Rights America: The Search for Social Justice, 1968-Present. 
CZ, EI, R, W Central outcomes of the Civil Rights Movement, 1968 to the present; critical reading and 
discussion, research and writing on racial and social equality and inequality in major areas of American life, 
notably electoral politics; education; religion and ethics; and public culture. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 408S
483S. Capstone Seminar: History of Torture. CZ, EI, R, W This class offers a history of torture in the 
western world, from the Renaissance to the present. Students explore the topic primarily within the framework 
of legal history, from the institution of legal judicial torture in the late Middle Ages, through its formal abolition 
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, down to its reemergence as an instrument of combat in wars in the 
twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Instructor: Martin. One course.
484S. Capstone Seminar: African Americans and the World. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Research seminar 
centered on exploration of white supremacy and black civil rights movements in the context of American empire. 
Readings of primary and secondary sources focus on ideas about race and ethnicity, arguments over citizenship 
and subjectivity, and arrangements of political and economic power. Archival research required. Students will 
produce an original work rooted in the fields of African American history and the United States and the World. 
Instructor: Lentz-Smith. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 451S
488S. Capstone: Research in Human Rights. R, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 470S; 
also C-L: Environment 470S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 470S, Human Rights
490. Special Topics in History. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Seminars in Special Topics. Topics may vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Senior Thesis Seminar. CZ, R, W Designed to introduce qualified students to advanced methods 
of historical research and writing, and to the appraisal of critical historical issues. Open only to seniors, but 
not restricted to candidates for graduation with distinction. This course, when taken by a history major, is 
accompanied by either a year-long 490S-196S seminar, two courses at the 200 level, or 393-394 independent 
study, supervised by an instructor. One course.
496S. Senior Thesis Seminar. CZ, R, W Continuation of History 495S. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 History (HISTORY)456

501S. History of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, SS Explore history of sexuality around the globe, covering diverse 
time periods and regions. Examine methods and theories used in the study of sexuality, with attention to topics 
such as fertility, kinship, marriage, heterosexuality, homosexuality, birth control, sexology, and community 
formation. Instructor: Sigal. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 501S
502S. Japan Since 1945. CCI, CZ, R Issues relating to post-War Japan. Topics include: the Occupation; 
democracy in postwar Japan; the rise of mass consumption; security and the US-Japan alliance; the political 
system; popular culture; arts and literature; the transformation of the countryside; the creation of an economic 
superpower; the myth of the kaisha; moments of conflict and crisis. Instructor: Partner. One course.
503. Research Methods in Japanese (B). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Japanese 650; also C-L: Sociology 
664
504S. East Asia’s Twentieth Century. CCI, CZ, R Historiographical review of twentieth-century East 
Asian history. Through weekly readings, study influential historical analyses of the period. Compare and 
evaluate historical approaches and key debates. Review methodologies of historical research on modern East 
Asia. Work with primary source materials in East Asian history. Research paper required. Instructor: Barnes or 
Partner. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 504S
505S. Race, Class, and Gender: A Social History of Modern (1750-present) Britain. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS body of scholarship examined addresses the nature and transformation of social relations in Great Britain 
in the wake of the major watersheds of the modern period, including the world’s first industrial revolution, 
imperial expansion, political economy and democratization, world wars, the rise and fall of the welfare state, 
decolonization, Commonwealth immigration, and admission into the European Union. Examines impact of 
theoretical influences on the academy ranging from Marxism through the Cold War, feminism and anti-racism, 
and post structuralism to post colonialism. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American 
Studies 515S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 509S
506S. Religion, Conflict and Holy War in the Pre-Modern West: Sects and Violence. CCI, CZ, 
EI, SS, W Violence as a cultural phenomenon in the pre-modern world. How did enactment of violence, 
objectification by violence and immunity from violence produce social, political and religious identities? Topics: 
the dialectic of violence and peacemaking in the Christian tradition; aesthetics, performance and emotions in 
violent confrontations; the role of violence in state and community formation; religious groups as mediators 
and fomenters of conflict; violence in millenarian movements. Readings combine primary sources, secondary 
sources and theory. Students of anthropology, law and political studies will find topics of interest. Instructor: 
Malegam. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 556S
507S. Asian Studies: Critical Introduction to Knowledge Fields and Methodologies. CCI, CZ, 
SS Examination of fundamental methodologies and historiography central to knowledge production about Asia 
in the Social Sciences, Humanities and Environmental Studies. An overview of nineteenth and twentieth century 
European discourses of Orientalism and Eurocentrism; the evolution of “Area Studies” models of inquiry and 
the bifurcations of Asian Studies; the impact of Cold War politics on the development of the field of Asian 
Studies in the United States; globalization, the environment and East Asia. Instructor: Mazumdar. One course.
509S. United States Policy in the Middle East. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 503S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
510S. The History of Neoliberalism in the US. CZ, EI, SS A readings course to introduce graduate 
students and advanced undergraduates to the historical literature on one of the most important developments 
of our times: the rise and spread of neoliberalism (or as it is sometimes called by critics, “free-market 
fundamentalism”) and to guide students in applying this scholarship to their own areas of interest. Instructor: 
Maclean. One course.
511S. The Margins of Justice: Law and Minorities in the Middle Ages. CCI, CZ, SS A study of how 
law impacted minorities in the Middle Ages: outlaws, Jews, homosexuals, foreigners, disabled and poor. Surveys 
how socially disadvantaged persons navigated royal authority in France and England after 1100. While most 
reading is secondary sources, we use literature, saints’ lives, charters and law codes to reconstruct medieval 
conceptions of justice, to ask what is law, and to reconstruct state formation through experiences of people 
usually relegated to the margins. For graduate students and motivated senior undergraduates. Instructor: 
Malegam. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 561S



History (HISTORY) 457

513S. Race, Class, and Gender in the University. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 502S; also C-L: Sociology 502S
514S. Culture and Environment in Modern Chinese History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS Examination of 
the changing patterns through which the physical environment and culture are mutually formed in late imperial 
and modern China. Culture includes creation of cosmological and social ideas as well as long term practices 
of settlement and utilization of the environment. In what ways did cultures represent limits to environmental 
exploitation? Special attention to how communities and the state respond to environmental disasters and 
explore the feedback loops for protection and prevention. Explores the importance of long-term understanding 
for the current environmental crisis in China. Instructor: Duara. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 531S
516. The Roman Republic. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 532
518S. Merchants, Coolies, Prostitutes: The Treaty Ports of Nineteenth Century East Asia. CCI, R, 
SS The course will examine the treaty ports of East Asia – Shanghai, Tianjin, Yokohama, Nagasaki and others 
– from the perspective of both foreign and local residents. Students will review available English-language 
sources, and carry out a research project on a city of their choice. Instructor: Partner. One course.
519S. The Society and Economy of Europe, 1400-1700. CCI, CZ, R The dynamism of the early modern 
world with a focus on Europe’s recovery and expansion during the “long sixteenth century;” special attention 
to the relationship of population structures to the economy, agrarian expansion and the world of the village; 
capitalist trade and industry; the “crisis of the seventeenth century;” family and household structures; the 
aristocracy; and the structure of life at court, in the cities and countryside. Instructor: Robisheaux. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 570S
520S. Microhistory. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Examines methods of micro-historical analysis, focusing on 
distinctive practices that define this popular form of history writing, including how to reduce the scale of 
analysis; interpreting clues as a “scientific paradigm”; treating culture as action; using historical contexts 
and theories; identifying historical actors; and crafting historical narratives. For advanced undergraduates, 
graduate students from any field interested in micro-analysis, historical theory and method and story-telling. 
Requirements include short essays and major research paper based on primary sources from any field or period 
of history. Instructor: Robisheaux. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 576S
522S. Jerusalem after Rome. CCI, CZ, R, W In this discussion seminar, we trace the history of how a 
city became sacred to three religions, the impact of the Crusades on the demography and built environment of 
Jerusalem and the memory of medieval Jerusalem today. For students interested in history, literature, religious 
and social conflict, architecture and archaeology. One research paper, one literature review, and regular reading 
responses. Reading load is moderate to heavy. Instructor: Malegam. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 552S
523S. Religion and Society in the Age of the Reformation. CZ, R The social history of religion in the 
age of the Protestant Reformation and Catholic Renewal; ritual and community in the fifteenth century; the 
Protestant Reformation and social change; the urban reformation in Germany and Switzerland; women and 
reform; Protestant and Catholic marriage, household and kinship; Catholic renewal; the formation of religious 
confessional identities; religion and violence; interpreting “popular” religious culture; and witchcraft. Instructor: 
Robisheaux. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 575S
524S. Sovereignty and Monarchy in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W This course focuses on 
the history of sovereignty in Arab monarchies in the twentieth century. Sovereignty is a fundamental legal, 
philosophical, political, geographical, and even cultural concept. The readings critically explore the idea of 
sovereignty as a historically changing and context-dependent concept. What is sovereignty? What types of 
sovereignties can we distinguish? How have new Arab nation-states claimed sovereign status within the global 
order? How is sovereignty related to the ability to govern? In addition to the history of ideas and law, we 
explore the local perception of sovereignty in monarchies, and the symbolism and material culture of the Arab 
kingdoms. Instructor: Mestyan. One course.
526S. Columbus: A Global History. CCI, CZ, R, W This seminar returns to the global framework of 
Columbus’s encounters with what would come to be called the New World. Students will study medieval 
conceptions of the world in maps, cosmographies, and travel literature as well as developments in China and 



 History (HISTORY)458

the Americas before 1492. Our central focus will be texts by Columbus and his contemporaries: Peter Martyr 
d’Anghiera, Amerigo Vespucci, Martin Waldseemüller, Bartolomé de las Casas, Peri Reis, Mehmed el-Su’udi, 
and Jacopo ha-Kohen. Attention will be given to slavery, colonization, evangelization, prophecy, apocalypticism, 
and resistance. We will also explore the economic and intellectual consequences of Columbus’s voyages across 
time. Instructor: Martin. One course.
528S. Greek History: Fifth through First Centuries BC. CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 528S
530S. Camera Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Art History 535S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 531S
531S. Art and the Holocaust: Architecture, Art, and Cultural Politics during the Nazi Period. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 525S; also C-L: German 565S, Jewish Studies 
555S
532S. Fin-de-siècle and Interwar Vienna: Politics, Society, and Culture. CCI, CZ, R, SS Advanced 
undergraduate and graduate colloquium and research seminar focusing on the cultural milieu of fin-de-
siècle and interwar Vienna. Readings in the Austro-Marxists, the Austrian School of Economics, Freud, Kraus, 
the Logical Positivists, Musil, Popper, and Wittgenstein. Monographs on the Habsburg Empire, Fin-de-
siècle culture and technology, Viennese feminism, Austrian socialism, philosophy of science, literature and 
ethics, and the culture of the Central European émigrés. Instructor: Hacohen. One course. C-L: German 532S
533S. Greek History from the Bronze Age to the Fifth Century BCE. CZ One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 524S
534S. Roman History from Romulus to Augustus. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 532S
535S. The Russian Intelligentsia and the Origins of the Revolution. CZ, R Origin and dynamics of the 
Russian revolutionary movement, the intelligentsia, and the emergence of the labor movement. Instructor: M. 
Miller. One course. C-L: Russian 515S, International Comparative Studies
536S. The Russian Revolution. CZ, R An analysis of the Bolshevik seizure of power in 1917 and the 
establishment of a revolutionary society and state during the 1920s. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
537S. Post War Europe, 1945-1968: Politics, Society, and Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS Politics, 
society and culture in Western Europe during the postwar years focusing on Cold War culture, liberalism and 
intellectual life. “East” and “West” during the Cold War: A comparative examination of Western European 
societies’ and movements’ responses to communism, highlighting debates on the morality of socialism and 
capitalism and on liberty, historical determinism, and individual responsibility. Examination of the anxieties 
and hopes evoked by postwar technological and economic progress—by “Americanization” and the “Economic 
Miracle.” Instructor: Hacohen. One course. C-L: Political Science 515S, International Comparative Studies 537S
538. The Roman Empire. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 536
539S. Roman History from Augustus through Late Antiquity. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 536S
540S. Ethnohistory of Latin America. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 570S; 
also C-L: Literature 573S
541S. Intellectual History and Political Theory. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Overview of current and historical 
approaches to intellectual history and the history of political thought, elucidating their theoretical foundations. 
Discussion of the major problems involved in the study of texts, ideas and culture and the vocabulary used 
by historians and political theorists. Readings in the classics of the field from Huizinga, Lovejoy, Febvre and 
Strauss to Skinner, Pocock and Bourdieu. Focus on joint projects of historians and political theorists. Instructor: 
Hacohen. One course. C-L: Political Science 573S
542S. Atlantic Constellations: Migration, Exile, Second Slavery. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: 
see Spanish 539S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 539S
543S. Piracy and European Imperial Expansion in the Atlantic Basin, 1492-1730. CCI, CZ, R, 
SS Exploration of the origins, development, and decline of privateering and piracy as systems of maritime 
predation in the Atlantic basin during the period 1492-1730, building on related processes in the Mediterranean. 



History (HISTORY) 459

Includes extensive study of Atlantic maritime history broadly defined. Instructor: Gaspar. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 543S
546. History of Poverty in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 561; also 
C-L: Public Policy 528, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 561, Human Rights
548S. Global History of Medicine. CCI, CZ, EI, STS The study of medicine as an object of critical analysis 
is a rapidly growing and exciting subfield in both history and anthropology. In English-language scholarship, 
the biggest conceptual leaps appear in works that analyze post-colonial spaces in Africa, Asia and the Americas, 
and engage with—and critique—the methodological and theoretical tools of postcolonialism, poststructuralism, 
governmentality, subaltern studies, Science and Technology Studies (STS), and sociology of scientific knowledge 
(SSK). We will read and discuss recent and renowned works. Instructor: Barnes. One course. C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 584S, Global Health 548S
549S. Histories of Science and Technology. CCI, CZ, SS, STS This course introduces students to 
methods in the history of science and technology, with attention to global and interdisciplinary perspectives. 
In addition to various historical approaches, readings may also include work in ethnography, feminist theory, 
postcolonial studies, Science & Technology Studies (STS), environmental studies, and other related fields. 
Particular emphasis will be placed on understandings of materials and material agency, as well as situating a 
range of themes central to modern science and technology—such as quantification, innovation, infrastructure, 
and information—within broader historical contexts. Instructor: Hepler-Smith. One course. C-L: Science & 
Society 549S, Global Health 549S, Energy and the Environment
550S. Life Stories: How to Write Them, What They Mean. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W How does a historian 
construct the narrative of a life? What gives a life meaning? How do we understand and connect imaginatively 
to the life experiences of the people who lived history rather than those who made it? What are the pitfalls of 
reconstructed experience—e.g. selective memory, ideological bias, and narrative over-simplification? How do we 
use the power of narrative responsibly? This course focuses on the lives and historical experiences of individuals. 
The emphasis of the class will be on the lives of relatively unknown figures such as farmers, merchants and 
housewives. Instructor: Partner. One course.
553S. Urban Histories in Global, Comparative, and Historical Perspective. CCI, CZ This course 
examines the origins and growth of cities, and the role urban life has played shaping politics, culture, and society 
in both local and global contexts. Specific topics and subjects vary; please consult course synopsis for more detail 
and information. Instructor: Thorne. One course.
554S. Contemporary Dance History. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Dance 665S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 509S
556S. The Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 556S; also C-L: Political Science 
542S
557. Cultural Memory. ALP, CCI, R, W One course. C-L: see French 557; also C-L: Literature 557
561S. Global Africa. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 561S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 510S, Political Science 527S, International Comparative Studies 510S
562S. Courts, Wars, Legacies of Wars. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 661S
564S. Toleration, Freedom of Conscience, and Religious Liberty. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 564S; also C-L: Political Science 588S, Religion 564S
567S. American Grand Strategy. CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Political Science 562S; also C-L: 
Public Policy 501S
572S. Anthropology and History. SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 501S; also C-L: Romance 
Studies 521S
577S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 
541S; also C-L: Literature 521S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 541S, Science & Society
582S. Narrative, History, and Historical Fiction. ALP, CZ, R, W Examines alternative approaches 
to the reading and writing of history, particularly the use of narrative. Explores the power of narrative on the 
human imagination. Explores issues of writing “responsible” narrative history/historical fiction. Class reads 



 History (HISTORY)460

and discusses selected works of historical fiction and narrative non-fiction. Combines theoretical overview 
with workshop format. The major project is to write a substantial piece of narrative history or historical fiction. 
Instructor: Partner. One course.
587. Modern Literature and History. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see French 556
590S. Topics in History Seminar. Seminars in advanced topics designed for graduate students and 
advanced undergraduates. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
601S. Introduction to Jewish Studies. One course. C-L: see Jewish Studies 601S; also C-L: Religion 613S
610S. Africa, Cuba, Brazil: Great Powers of the Black Atlantic. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 610S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 610S, Romance Studies 522S
611. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, R One course. C-L: see French 611; also 
C-L: Literature 609
627. Soviet and Post-Soviet Economic History. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Economics 627; 
also C-L: Russian 627

The Major
The history major has three objectives. First, it offers students broad exposure to the histories of our own 

and other societies, to the recent and the more distant past, and to the variety of approaches to the study of history. 
Second, it allows the in-depth study of the history of a particular time and place or a particular type of history. 
Breadth of knowledge is achieved through the distribution requirements for coursework across five geographic 
areas and in pre-modern as well as modern history. Depth is achieved through the requirement that students 
identify a concentration. Third, it develops the skills of historical thinking necessary for better understanding 
our own and other human societies, to gather and interpret evidence, and to fashion and compellingly convey 
arguments grounded in this evidence. These skills are first developed in the gateway and fully developed in a 
senior capstone seminar.

Major Requirements: Ten history courses, at least seven of which must be at or above the 200 level. 
One Advanced Placement credit may count toward meeting the ten-course history requirement but does not 
count toward meeting the area or concentration requirements below. AP courses will not count toward the major 
for students matriculating after Fall 2017. The ten courses may include courses cross-listed as history courses 
regardless of the department through which the student enrolls. However, the number of the cross-listed courses 
allowed toward the major may change, and students are urged to consult the History department website for 
updates as they declare their major.

The ten courses are to be distributed as follows:
• Gateway Seminar: One gateway seminar usually by the end of the sophomore year. 
• Areas of History: One course each in any three of the five geographic areas listed below; two courses 

in the pre-modern era (see pre-1800 course list on department website).
• Concentration: At least four courses in the student’s area of concentration. A concentration may 

be chosen from a geographic or thematic area. Students may propose other thematic areas, and seek 
approval from the director of undergraduate studies and the student’s history advisor. One course 
below the 100 level may be counted toward the student’s concentration; concentration courses may 
count toward meeting the area and pre-modern distribution requirements.

• Capstone Seminar: Each major must take at least one capstone research seminar (400-level history 
seminar). This seminar is usually taken in the senior year, but may also be open to juniors. The senior 
thesis seminar (History 495S and 4965S) substitutes for the capstone seminar for those students 
enrolled. 

Geographic Areas are as follows (see department website for individual courses in each area): 
• Africa and Middle East
• Asia
• Europe and Russia
• Global or Comparative
• Latin America and Caribbean
• United States and Canada 



House Course (HOUSECS) 461

Thematic Areas are as follows (see department website for individual courses in each area): 
• Race and Ethnicity
• Economic and Business Cultures
• Human Rights and Social Movements
• Law and Governance
• Medicine, Science, and Technology 
• War, Military, and Society 
• Women, Gender, and Sexuality
Pre-Modern Courses focus substantially on eras before 1800. Pre-1800 courses are listed on the department 

website.
• Double Counting: Courses can fulfill two or more requirements. For example, History 257 

would count as both a pre-modern class and as a European geographic area. For a student with a 
concentration on Europe, it would also count toward the concentration requirement.

• Advanced Placement: One (1) Advanced Placement course (with a score of four or five) in any field 
of history may count as one of the ten required courses for the history major. This AP credit does not 
count toward meeting the area or concentration requirements for the major. AP courses will not count 
toward the major for students matriculating after Fall 2017.

• Transfer Credit: Up to one course taken at other universities or in an approved study abroad program 
that receive transfer credit may count toward the history major.

• Foreign Languages: Majors interested in a particular area of study benefit from knowledge of the 
language of that area. Majors who contemplate graduate work are reminded that most graduate 
programs require a reading knowledge of one or more foreign languages.

• Majors Planning to Teach: Majors who plan to teach in secondary schools should consult an advisor 
in education. Rising juniors who intend to practice-teach in the senior year should consider taking the 
senior capstone seminar as juniors.

• Departmental Graduation with Distinction: Any student who is qualified (see the section on 
honors in this bulletin) may apply to the director of undergraduate studies for permission to undertake 
work leading to a degree with distinction in history. 

The Minor
The history minor offers students specializing in another department or program the opportunity to enrich 

their studies with a historical perspective. 
Requirements: A minimum of five history courses, at least three of which must be at the 200 level or above. 

Cross-listed courses are acceptable regardless of the department through which the student enrolls. Courses taken 
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory and Advanced Placement credits do not count toward the minor; one transfer course 
may count toward the requirements for the minor. 

House Courses
House courses, offered in the fall and spring terms, are intended to provide academic experiences that are 

not offered by regular departmental courses. A house course must be hosted by a residential unit, sponsored by 
a Trinity College faculty member and a department in Trinity College of Arts & Sciences, and approved by the 
Committee on Courses of the Arts and Sciences Council. House courses carry a 0.5 course credit. In the Pratt School 
of Engineering, house courses cannot be used to meet degree requirements. In Trinity College, no more than 2.0 
course credits earned in house courses can be counted toward the course requirement for graduation. House 
courses do not count toward other requirements. Grades are submitted only on the Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory 
basis. Further details are available in 011 Allen Building. 

House Course (HOUSECS)
59. House Course. Special topics course. Information about specific offerings each term available prior to 
the start of classes at the following website: https://trinity.duke.edu/house-courses/courses. Satisfactory/
Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Staff. Half course.

https://trinity.duke.edu/house-courses/courses


 Human Development (HUMANDEV)462

Human Development
A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The goal of the human development interdisciplinary program is to broaden the perspectives of students 

interested in human development and human behavior and to enhance students’ understanding of the 
biopsychosocial perspective of development across the life course. The program also highlights ways in which 
relevant disciplines conceptualize and study continuity and changes across the human life course, demonstrates 
how disciplinary perspectives complement and extend each other, and facilitates dialogue among faculty and 
students with common interests in human behavior.

The program’s goals are fostered by an integrated curriculum of required and elective courses that include 
a research apprenticeship and a capstone senior seminar. All students enrolled in the certificate program receive 
personal advising from the program director as they plan their course and research opportunities. Students who 
complete all six required courses receive a certificate; however, participation in human development courses (224 
and 260) is available to all undergraduates.

The curriculum for the human development certificate includes four required courses and two electives. 
The required courses, described below, are Human Development 224 (Human Development); and either Human 
Development 260 (Psychosocial Aspects of Development) or Psychology 474S (Biological Psychology of Human 
Development); Human Development 401 (Research Apprenticeship in Human Development); and Human 
Development 450S (Capstone Seminar in Human Development). Note: The Research Apprenticeship experience 
can also be met by completing a research independent study in an academic department; this requires approval 
by the director of the program.

Two elective courses are chosen from a list of biological, psychological, and social science courses 
affiliated with the program published in the program brochure and on the program website at https://sites.
duke.edu/centerforaging/education-and-training/research-training-in-aging-and-human-development/the-
undergraduate-program-in-human-development/. The Research Apprenticeship arranged through the program 
and the senior seminar are available only to students seeking the program certificate. Other components of the 
program are available to all undergraduates.

Courses in Human Development (HUMANDEV)
224. Human Development (D). CCI, EI, R, SS The multidisciplinary nature of developmental research; 
the psychological, social, cultural, and biological paradigms as they relate to human development; normative 
and non-normative behaviors and changing cultural values across the life course; comparison of how different 
age groups (e.g., children, young adults) modify values to work within their specific cultural and social needs. 
Designed for sophomores enrolled in or considering the Certificate Program in Human Development. Reserved 
for first- year and sophomore students only. Consent required for juniors and seniors. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Sociology 224
260. Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development. CCI, EI, SS Biological, cultural, behavioral, 
and social arenas of human development throughout the human life span, with emphasis on the comparison 
of socially constructed age groups. Examination of age groups in terms of their unique ethical values and 
challenges, as well as the social dilemmas caused by the extension of life expectancy. Psychosocial development 
between (1) men and women, (2) African Americans, Hispanics, Asians, and Caucasians, and (3) different 
socioeconomic strata. Service-learning project with daily journals required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Psychology 236, Sociology 260, Ethics Elective
391. Independent Study in Human Development. Independent Study of selected theoretical, 
methodological, and applied topics with emphasis on social change, psychological development, and policy 
issues in aging societies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401. Research Apprenticeship in Human Development. R Supervised research in a laboratory, on a 
specified research project, or in an organizational setting. Consent of the Director of the Undergraduate Program 
in Human Development required. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
450S. Capstone Seminar in Human Development. CCI, EI, R, SS Synthesis of developmental theories 
with real-life experiences over the life course. Current ethical and moral issues, such as biomedical ethics and 
values across the life course (including treatment of very low birth weight babies to Do Not Resuscitate orders), 
and comparisons among different age groups. Normative and non-normative behavior across the life course. 

https://sites.duke.edu/centerforaging/education-and-training/research-training-in-aging-and-human-de
https://sites.duke.edu/centerforaging/education-and-training/research-training-in-aging-and-human-de
https://sites.duke.edu/centerforaging/education-and-training/research-training-in-aging-and-human-de


Human Development (HUMANDEV) 463

Individual and group research projects required. Consent of instructor required. Students required to take this 
course as second-semester seniors in order to receive the Human Development Certificate. Instructor: Gustafson 
or Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research directed study in a field of special interest on 
a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantial academic 
product. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Other Courses
Neuroscience
340S. Educational Neuroscience
Psychology
340S. Educational Neuroscience
435S. The Role of Race and Culture on Development
474S. Biological Psychology of Human Development

Human Rights
Professor Kirk, Director; Professor Weinthal, Chair, Certificate Committee

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The goal of the undergraduate certificate in human rights is to provide students with an opportunity to 

pursue a rigorous interdisciplinary study of human rights. We will help cultivate life-long learners and engaged 
citizens who have a deep and nuanced understanding of human rights. This course of study requires foundational 
study in human rights history, theory, and policy issues, with particular attention to how the intellectual debates 
around rights translate into action in an increasingly globalized, interconnected world. Human rights cannot 
be isolated into one or even a few disciplines and its study must draw on the concepts and lived experience of 
scholars, practitioners, journalists and communities struggling to defend their rights. 

Including a Gateway, Introduction to Human Rights, and a final Capstone in Human Rights, students 
will take a total of six undergraduate courses. Students will be encouraged to seek rights-related DukeEngage 
placements, internship and volunteer experiences, and to include study abroad courses as part of their certificate 
plan, so long as these courses have received prior approval from Duke and the Certificate Director. These elements 
will enrich a student’s experience in the Capstone.

The certificate includes 1) a structured and interdisciplinary set of courses; 2) analytical, empirical, and 
applied elements; 3) education in the history and current practice of human rights in the United States and 
abroad; 4) exposure to key thinkers and debates about and within human rights, including the critique of human 
rights; 5) skills development in research and writing; 6) the application of knowledge toward real-world solutions; 
and 7) in-depth mentored research with faculty working in human rights.

Sequencing is a critical element in the study of human rights. Students are encouraged to enroll as soon 
as possible but no later than the end of Drop/Add in the fall of their junior year. Enrollment takes place after a 
student prepares a declaration of interest submitted to the Certificate Director. This declaration must include a 
written statement of no more than 250 words; identification of the four courses that will be the electives chosen 
to complete the certificate; and a potential research project for the Capstone. Students will be assigned an adviser 
who will help plan a coherent pathway.

Certificate Requirements
Six courses are required for completion of the human rights certificate.
1. A required Gateway, Introduction to Human Rights. This course gives priority to first-year students 

and sophomores, ideally building a cohort with other students also interested in human rights.
2. Four electives. A course can count toward the human rights certificate if it contains a preponderance of 

readings or other materials of inquiry that reference human and civil rights history, concepts, theory, 
practice, discourse, advocacy or a combination of these elements. A course may have a thematic focus 
on human rights, including in areas of civil rights and social justice; it may have a regional focus, 
examining rights in a specific location; or a disciplinary focus, as in how a specific type of study, like 
biology or literature, approaches a rights question. Prior to registration each semester, the DHRC@FHI 
will prepare a list of pre-approved courses in consultation with the Faculty Advisory Board. Students 



 Human Rights (RIGHTS)464

are required to take courses from at least two disciplines. No more than two of the four courses may 
come from the same home department. 

3. Students may petition for a course to count toward the certificate by submitting a syllabus and rationale 
for the relevance to the Director of the certificate, specifying how it meets the criteria listed above. This 
would include courses taken outside Duke, including study abroad. We encourage students to search 
out study abroad courses that would count toward the human rights certificate. 

4. A capstone seminar, Capstone in Human Rights. This course is offered to students in their senior 
year who have completed the Gateway and are enrolled in the human rights certificate program. A 
primary learning objective of this course is to connect the intellectual themes and scholarly knowledge 
they develop in the Gateway, electives and any rights-related experiences (through DukeEngage or 
internships and volunteer placements). The capstone requires students to critically re-visit themes 
introduced in the gateway course. The capstone culminates with a final project that requires students 
to choose a subject and produce research. Students may work in teams toward a final project but each 
student’s work will be evaluated separately and at a high standard.

5. All human rights certificate students are required to present their work to their peers in a mini-
conference or other forum. Students are encouraged to present their work in other public for or 
in benefit of an individual or group engaged in rights work. This could be through performance or 
web-based pieces, videos, op-ed columns, published essays, public exhibits, or other media. Where 
appropriate, students’ projects can link or be combined with departmental honors projects. 

Courses in Human Rights (RIGHTS)

Special Topics Courses
89S. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructors consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Human Rights. Topics vary by semester. Check individual semester offerings for 
prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Introduction to Human Rights
104. Introduction to Human Rights: Gateway for the Human Rights Certificate. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 104; also C-L: Public Policy 162, International Comparative 
Studies 113

Capstone to Human Rights
470S. Capstone: Research in Human Rights. R, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 470S; 
also C-L: Environment 470S, History 488S

Duke Immerse Rights and Identities



Human Rights (RIGHTS) 465

245S. Human Rights in the Americas. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 245S; also 
C-L: Latin American Studies 246S, History 242S, International Comparative Studies
389S. Family Rights/Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 389S; also C-L: Public 
Policy 346S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South

Duke Immerse Policy and Society
235S. Comparative Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
235S; also C-L: Public Policy 285S, International Comparative Studies 213S, African & African American Studies 
234S
236S. Advanced Research Seminar in Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, R, SS, W One course. 
C-L: see Political Science 236S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 237S
319S. US Comparative State Politics. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 319S

Duke Immerse Global Refugee Crisis
216S. Global Migration and Ethics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 216S; also C-L: 
Study of Ethics 262S, International Comparative Studies 244S

Other Courses
111FS. Pursuit of Equality: Rethinking Schools - Lens of Social Justice. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Education 111FS
112FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see 
Education 112FS; also C-L: Public Policy 183FS, Russian 121FS, Science & Society 112FS
113FS. Enterprising Leadership and Civic Engagement. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Education 113FS; 
also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 113FS
130. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Music 130; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 131, International Comparative Studies, Documentary Studies
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 148; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 244, Environment 147, Jewish Studies 148, Public 
Policy 178, Political Science 159, Islamic Studies, Ethics Electives
156S. Gateway Seminar: Cold War America. CZ, EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 156S
178FS. Refugees, Rights, and Resettlement. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 178FS; also C-L: 
Study of Ethics 199FS
183S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 183S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 187S, African & African American Studies 133S, 
International Comparative Studies 183S, Public Policy 175S
201. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Education 201; also C-L: Public Policy 203, Political Science 213
201S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Education 201S; also C-L: Public Policy 206S, Political Science 213S
204FS. Documenting the Middle East: Community and Oral History. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 204FS; also C-L: Documentary Studies 204FS
205. Introduction to Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics. CCI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Political Science 205; also C-L: African & African American Studies 257
207. Humanitarianism in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see History 207; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 271, Islamic Studies
208. The Anthropology of Race. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 208; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 251, International Comparative Studies 239
211. Social Inequality. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 211; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist 



 Human Rights (RIGHTS)466

Studies
212. Gender and Global Health. SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 212; also C-L: Sociology 212
213. United States Environmental Policy. EI, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Environment 212; also 
C-L: Public Policy 275, Energy and the Environment, Marine Science and Conservation
213S. Feminist Art from the 1970s to the Present. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 213S; also C-L: Art History 213S
214S. Ethical Challenges in Environmental Conservation. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Environment 214S; also C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
215. Sociology of Racism in America. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 215; also C-L: African 
& African American Studies 246, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 316, Marxism and Society
218S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies). CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 310S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 310S, Public Policy 218S
219. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
319; also C-L: African & African American Studies 219, International Comparative Studies 263, Latin American 
Studies
219S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 219S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 209S, International Comparative Studies 365S, History 225S, Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 224S, Cultural Anthropology 224S
220S. Anthropology and Global Health. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Global Health 220S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 218S
221. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Education 220; also C-L: African & African American Studies 232, Sociology 202
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding. 
CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Environment 216S; also C-L: Public Policy 279S, Political Science 367S, 
International Comparative Studies 229S, Marine Science and Conservation, Islamic Studies
238S. History of Political Nonviolence. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 238S; also C-L: Public 
Policy 248S
239D. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
History 374D; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 239D
246S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 347S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 246S, African & African American Studies 236S
249. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 317; also C-L: Religion 234, African & African American Studies 249, Public Policy 253
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 254; also C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 254, International Comparative Studies 254, 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South
259S. Student Activism, Storytelling, and Community Change. ALP, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 259S; also C-L: Writing 259S
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 272; 
also C-L: Public Policy 231, Philosophy 262, International Comparative Studies 272, Documentary Studies, 
Ethics Elective, Global Health
271S. Public Policy Video. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 271S; also C-L: Public 
Policy 375S, Visual and Media Studies 377S
272. Genocide and Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 272; also C-L: Public 
Policy 345
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 277S; also C-L: Global Health 277S, Public Policy 274S, Russian 277S, Study of Ethics 277S



Human Rights (RIGHTS) 467

279. Gandhi: Image and Reflection. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 279; also C-L: Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 158
280S. Religion and Peace: Case Studies in Activism and Reconciliation. CCI, CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Religion 280S
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas. EI, SS One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 283SL; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 285SL, African & African American Studies 
283SL, Latin American Studies 283SL, Latin American Studies
288. Acts of Engagement. CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 288
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 295S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 295S, Religion 295S, International Comparative 
Studies 222S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 296S
297. The Holocaust. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 297; also C-L: Jewish Studies 342, 
Religion 342, Political Science 262
301S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab. EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 301S; 
also C-L: Political Science 341S, International Comparative Studies 317S, Public Policy 311S, Markets and 
Management Studies
302. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 302; 
also C-L: International Comparative Studies 295, Science & Society
303S. De/Re/Segregation in Education: A Case of Back to the Future?. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Education 303S; also C-L: Public Policy 340S
305S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 347S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 305S, History 385S
308S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see Polish 308S; also C-L: Religion 269S, Jewish Studies 269S
309. Chinese Im/migration: Chinese Migrant Labor and Immigration to the US. ALP, CCI, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 309
310. African American Women and History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 349; also C-L: African 
& African American Studies 310, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 237
312. War and Public Health in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 312; also C-L: Public Policy 333, Cultural Anthropology 312, Global Health 312
313S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 
332S; also C-L: Sociology 323S, Political Science 313S
315-20. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Structural Focus. QS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 315-20; also C-L: Environment 365-20, Public 
Policy 211-20
315-60. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Environmental Focus. QS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 315-60; also C-L: Environment 365-60, Public 
Policy 211-60
316S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 316S; also C-L: History 386S, Public Policy 327S, Political Science 337S
317S. Veterans Oral History Project. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 317S; also C-L: 
History 381S
320S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom 
Struggle. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 320S; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 231S, History 356S
321S. Refugee Lives: Violence, Culture and Identity. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 320S; also C-L: Documentary Studies 321S



 Human Rights (RIGHTS)468

323S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 
320S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 247S, International Comparative Studies 320S, Latin 
American Studies 320S, Information Science + Studies 323S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 318S
325S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones. CCI, CZ, EI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 
325S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 332S, Global Health 325S
326. The South in Black and White. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 326; also 
C-L: African & African American Studies 230, History 358
327. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 327; also C-L: African 
& African American Studies 209, Portuguese 260, Latin American Studies
328. Global Brazil. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 328; also C-L: African & African American 
Studies 213, Latin American Studies 328
329S. Politics in Violence. R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Political Science 329S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 329S
330. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 
210; also C-L: Public Policy 330, International Comparative Studies 397
331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 331; also 
C-L: Economics 361, Philosophy 246, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 332S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 236S, Visual and Media Studies 
341S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 332S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
334S. Energy Futures and Environmental Justice. CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 345S; also C-L: Environment 343S
335. Free Speech: France-USA. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL One course. C-L: see French 335; also C-L: Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies 335
336S. Race in Durham. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 341S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 332S, History 339S
339. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking. ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 343; also C-L: Latin American Studies 343, Cultural Anthropology 342, 
Sociology 343
341. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 341; 
also C-L: International Comparative Studies 299, Science & Society 341
342S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics. ALP, CCI, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 341S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 238S, Public Policy 380S, International 
Comparative Studies 342S
343. History of Modern America: The United States from 1930 to present. CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 343; also C-L: Public Policy 342
344. History of U.S. Social Movements. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 344; also C-L: 
Public Policy 344
345. African Americans, Mass Incarceration and Citizenship. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 345; also C-L: Literature 343
346S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials. 
ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 346S; also C-L: History 350S, Public Policy 347S
346T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling. 
ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 347T; also C-L: History 340T, Public Policy 
340T
347S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 



Human Rights (RIGHTS) 469

Anthropology 347S; also C-L: Education 347S, History 334S, Sociology 324S, Public Policy 350S
348. The Civil Rights Movement. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 348; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 243, Ethics Elective
349S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 346S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 351S, History 396S, 
Political Science 336S, Public Policy 326S
350S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 350S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 225S, Visual and Media Studies 213S, Cultural Anthropology 262S, 
Public Policy 387S, International Comparative Studies 368S
352. Immigrant Dreams, U.S. Realities: Immigration Policy History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. 
C-L: see History 352; also C-L: Public Policy 220
360S. Feminist Activism: Social Movements. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 360S
361. Money, Sex, Power. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 361; 
also C-L: Markets and Management Studies, Marxism and Society
362S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American 
South. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 362S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 306S, African & African American Studies 245S
363. International Human Rights in World Politics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 363
368. Gender, Sexuality, and Human Rights. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 368; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 268
369. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 208, Global Health 208, History 249
369S. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 208S, Global Health 208S, History 249S
371. News as a Moral Battleground. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 371; also C-L: Public Policy 371, Study of Ethics 259, Documentary Studies 371, Documentary Studies
373S. The Spanish Civil War in History and Literature. ALP, CZ, EI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 
373S; also C-L: History 273S-1
374S. Islam in the Americas. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 384S; also C-L: History 351S, 
African & African American Studies 274S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 230S, Islamic Studies
384. Inequality in Western Political Thought. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 384
386S. Politics of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 386S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 386S, Public Policy 383S, History 346S
387. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 
387; also C-L: Jewish Studies 369, Literature 369, History 261
395. Language and Society. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see English 395; also C-L: Linguistics 451, Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 385, Cultural Anthropology 212, International Comparative Studies 395
396S. Language in Immigrant America. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 396S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 397S, Linguistics 396S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 396S, International Comparative 
Studies 396S
401. Gender and the Law. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 401; 
also C-L: Literature 430, Public Policy 315
403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
403S; also C-L: History 403S, International Comparative Studies 403S
406S. South African Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 406S; also C-L: History 450S, Political Science 406S, Public Policy 406S, Cultural Anthropology 406S



 Human Rights (RIGHTS)470

409S. Identity and Linguistic Rights in the Spanish Speaking Americas. CCI, CZ, EI, FL One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 409S; also C-L: Linguistics 409S
411S. Historicizing Whiteness. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 411S; also C-L: 
History 411S
428S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 432S; also 
C-L: Study of Sexualities 432S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 432S, International Comparative 
Studies 428S
431S. The Spanish Civil War: History, Literature, and Popular Culture. ALP, CZ, EI, FL, R One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 431S
432S. Popular Culture and Political Repression in Spain and Latin America. ALP, CCI, FL One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 432S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies, Latin American Studies
527S. Islam and Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Religion 527S
539S. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 539S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 539S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 502S, Literature 539S, Visual and Media 
Studies 539S
560S. Organized Compassion: History and Ethics of Humanitarianism. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Study of Ethics 560S; also C-L: Global Health 541S
561. History of Poverty in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 561; also 
C-L: History 546, Public Policy 528
603. The Palestinian-Israeli Conflict in Literature and Film. One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 603; also C-L: Jewish Studies 683
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 645S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 642S, Economics 541S, Sociology 642S, Political Science 642S
660. Global Mental Health. CCI, NS, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Global Health 660; also C-L: 
Psychology 611, Cultural Anthropology 611

Elective Courses

Special Courses: Duke Immerse Programs

Duke Immerse Rights and Identities
Cultural Anthropology
245S. Human Rights in the Americas
History
242S. Human Rights in the Americas
389S. Family Rights/Human Rights
Latin American Studies
246S. Human Rights in the Americas
Public Policy
346S. Family Rights/Human Rights

Duke Immerse Policy and Society
African & African American Studies
237S. Advanced Research Seminar in Urban Politics and Policymaking
Political Science
236S. Advanced Research Seminar in Urban Politics and Policymaking
319S. US Comparative State Politics

Duke Immerse Global Refugee Crisis
Cultural Anthropology
216S. Global Migration and Ethics
International Comparative Studies
244S. Global Migration and Ethics
Study of Ethics
262S. Global Migration and Ethics



Human Rights (RIGHTS) 471

Other Courses
African & African American Studies
133S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans
209. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
213. Global Brazil
214. South Africa: Past and Present
219. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
225S. Documenting Black Experiences
230. The South in Black and White
231S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom Struggle
232. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick
236S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray
243. The Civil Rights Movement
245S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American South
246. Sociology of Racism in America
247S. Social Movements and Social Media
249. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition
251. The Anthropology of Race
257. Introduction to Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics
271. Humanitarianism in Africa
274S. Islam in the Americas
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture
310. African American Women and History
310S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies)
312. War and Public Health in Africa
316S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy
341S. Race in Durham
343. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking
345. African Americans, Mass Incarceration and Citizenship
346S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa
347S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
158. Gandhi: Image and Reflection
187S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans
204FS. Documenting the Middle East: Community and Oral History
230S. Islam in the Americas
244. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture
309. Chinese Im/migration: Chinese Migrant Labor and Immigration to the US
317. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition
320S. Refugee Lives: Violence, Culture and Identity
539S. Queer China
603. The Palestinian-Israeli Conflict in Literature and Film
Civic Engagement and Social Change
201S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course)
Cultural Anthropology
113FS. Enterprising Leadership and Civic Engagement
131. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
208. The Anthropology of Race
212. Language and Society
218S. Anthropology and Global Health
236S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change
238S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics
246S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray
262S. Documenting Black Experiences
285SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
305S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective
306. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community
310S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies)
312. War and Public Health in Africa
332S. Race in Durham
342. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking
345S. Energy Futures and Environmental Justice
346S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials
347S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide
347T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling
397S. Language in Immigrant America



 Human Rights (RIGHTS)472

403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory
432S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship
539S. Queer China
611. Global Mental Health
Documentary Studies
204FS. Documenting the Middle East: Community and Oral History
248S. Environmental Conservation and Documentary Photography
271S. Public Policy Video
317S. Veterans Oral History Project
320S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom Struggle
321S. Refugee Lives: Violence, Culture and Identity
326. The South in Black and White
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change
341S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics
347S. Civil/Human Rights Activism: In the Spirit of Pauli Murray
350S. Documenting Black Experiences
362S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American South
366S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History
371. News as a Moral Battleground
Economics
361. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
541S. Global Inequality Research Seminar
Education
111FS. Pursuit of Equality: Rethinking Schools - Lens of Social Justice
112FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
113FS. Enterprising Leadership and Civic Engagement
201S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course)
220. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick
259S. Student Activism, Storytelling, and Community Change
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
303S. De/Re/Segregation in Education: A Case of Back to the Future?
347S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide
English
395. Language and Society
396S. Language in Immigrant America
Environment
147. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
216S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
222S. Environmental Conservation and Documentary Photography
343S. Energy Futures and Environmental Justice
French
325S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones
335. Free Speech: France-USA
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
237. African American Women and History
239D. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History
296S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture
306S. Activism, Women, and Danger: Documenting Race, Gender and Activism in the American South
368. Gender, Sexuality, and Human Rights
432S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship
502S. Queer China
German
387. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust
Global Health
210. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict
212. Gender and Global Health
220S. Anthropology and Global Health
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
302. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS
312. War and Public Health in Africa
325S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones
326. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community
340. Social Determinants of US Health Disparities
341. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control
541S. Organized Compassion: History and Ethics of Humanitarianism
660. Global Mental Health
History
156S. Gateway Seminar: Cold War America
183S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans
207. Humanitarianism in Africa



Human Rights (RIGHTS) 473

208. South Africa: Past and Present
238S. History of Political Nonviolence
261. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust
272. Genocide and Human Rights
297. The Holocaust
319. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
327. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
328. Global Brazil
334S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide
339S. Race in Durham
340T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling
343. History of Modern America: The United States from 1930 to present
344. History of U.S. Social Movements
348. The Civil Rights Movement
349. African American Women and History
350S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials
351S. Islam in the Americas
352. Immigrant Dreams, U.S. Realities: Immigration Policy History
356S. Documenting Black Power: Writing the History of the African American Freedom Struggle
358. The South in Black and White
374D. Women, Gender, and Sexuality in U.S. History
381S. Veterans Oral History Project
385S. White People: In Anthropological Perspective
386S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy
396S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa
398S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History
403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory
411S. Historicizing Whiteness
546. History of Poverty in the United States
Information Science + Studies
323S. Social Movements and Social Media
International Comparative Studies
128FS. Human Rights and World Politics
183S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans
222S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
239. The Anthropology of Race
263. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
272. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
295. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS
299. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control
317S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
320S. Social Movements and Social Media
329S. Politics in Violence
332S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones
342S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics
351S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa
368S. Documenting Black Experiences
395. Language and Society
396S. Language in Immigrant America
397. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict
403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory
428S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship
646S. Strategic Storytelling: Narratives for Development
Jewish Studies
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
269S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film
342. The Holocaust
369. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust
683. The Palestinian-Israeli Conflict in Literature and Film
Latin American Studies
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
320S. Social Movements and Social Media
328. Global Brazil
343. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking
Latino/a Studies in the Global South
306. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community
316. Sociology of Racism in America
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change



 Human Rights (RIGHTS)474

Linguistics
396S. Language in Immigrant America
409S. Identity and Linguistic Rights in the Spanish Speaking Americas
451. Language and Society
Literature
320S. Social Movements and Social Media
332S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization
343. African Americans, Mass Incarceration and Citizenship
369. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust
539S. Queer China
Molecular Genetics & Microbiology
120FS. Ethical Implications of Genetic and Genomic Research
Music
130. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches
Philosophy
246. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
Policy Journalism and Media Studies
335. Free Speech: France-USA
371. News as a Moral Battleground
Polish
308S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film
Political Science
159. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
176FS. Human Rights and World Politics
205. Introduction to Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics
213S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course)
221. South Africa: Past and Present
262. The Holocaust
272. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
313S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization
329S. Politics in Violence
331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
336S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa
337S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy
341S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
363. International Human Rights in World Politics
367S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar
682S. Legal Analysis for Development Governance
Portuguese
260. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
Psychology
611. Global Mental Health
Public Policy
178. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
181FS. Human Rights and World Politics
183FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
186FS. Ethical Implications of Genetic and Genomic Research
206S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course)
214. South Africa: Past and Present
218S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies)
220. Immigrant Dreams, U.S. Realities: Immigration Policy History
231. Human Rights in Theory and Practice
248S. History of Political Nonviolence
253. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition
274S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
279S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
311S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
326S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa
327S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy
330. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict
333. War and Public Health in Africa
340S. De/Re/Segregation in Education: A Case of Back to the Future?
340T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling
342. History of Modern America: The United States from 1930 to present
344. History of U.S. Social Movements
345. Genocide and Human Rights
347S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials
350S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide



Human Rights (RIGHTS) 475

371. News as a Moral Battleground
375S. Public Policy Video
380S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics
387S. Documenting Black Experiences
388S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History
411S. Historicizing Whiteness
528. History of Poverty in the United States
645S. Global Inequality Research Seminar
646S. Strategic Storytelling: Narratives for Development
647S. Legal Analysis for Development Governance
761. Human Rights and Conflict
Religion
234. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition
269S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film
279. Gandhi: Image and Reflection
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture
342. The Holocaust
384S. Islam in the Americas
Russian
121FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
Science & Society
112FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
341. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control
Slavic and Eurasian Studies
385. Language and Society
396S. Language in Immigrant America
Sociology
178FS. Refugees, Rights, and Resettlement
202. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick
211. Social Inequality
212. Gender and Global Health
215. Sociology of Racism in America
323S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization
324S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide
343. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking
361. Social Determinants of US Health Disparities
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar
Spanish
306. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community
409S. Identity and Linguistic Rights in the Spanish Speaking Americas
432S. Popular Culture and Political Repression in Spain and Latin America
Study of Ethics
129FS. Human Rights and World Politics
199FS. Refugees, Rights, and Resettlement
259. News as a Moral Battleground
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US
301S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
560S. Organized Compassion: History and Ethics of Humanitarianism
561. History of Poverty in the United States
646S. Strategic Storytelling: Narratives for Development
Study of Sexualities
268. Gender, Sexuality, and Human Rights
432S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship
Visual Arts
366S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History
Visual and Media Studies
213S. Documenting Black Experiences
323S. Social Movements and Social Media
341S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change
368S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History
377S. Public Policy Video
539S. Queer China

Information Science + Studies
Research Professor Szabo (Art, Art History & Visual Studies), Program Director and Curriculum Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.



 Information Science + Studies (ISS) 476

The Information Science + Studies (ISS) Program offers students an interdisciplinary approach to study the 
nature of information and its impact on art, culture, science, business, society, policy, and the environment. ISS 
helps students fill the gap between current academic training and the increasing demand in all professions for a 
broad understanding of the legal, social, philosophical, computational, cultural, and aesthetic issues concerning 
information technology and other related innovations. The program’s integrated curriculum combines topics and 
practices including information management; photonics and visualization; multimedia design; virtual reality, 
virtual worlds and games, issues of security, privacy, and property; and the history of science and technology. 
More information is available online at https://iss.duke.edu/.

Certificate Requirements
The certificate requirements include a team-taught introductory course, a communications course, three 

electives, and a research-oriented capstone course.
The ISS certificate requires six courses:
• Information Science + Studies 110 (Information, Society, and Culture) or Computer Science 92L 

(Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet)
• For non-computer science and non-engineering majors, Information Science + Studies 240L 

(Fundamentals of Web-based Multimedia Communications). For engineering and computer science 
majors, Engineering 206 or Computer Science 290 

• Three electives selected from a list of ISS-approved courses
• Information Science + Studies 495S (Research Capstone)
No more than three courses may originate in a single department and no more than two courses that are 

counted toward the ISS certificate may also satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, or other certificate 
program.

Program Enrollment
Only students who have officially declared their major may enroll in the program, although all students may 

take ISS courses on a first-come/first-served basis, with ISS certificate students having preference.

Courses in Information Science + Studies (ISS) 
89S. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
101L. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet. EI, QS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Computer Science 92L; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies
110. Information, Society & Culture: Bass Connections Gateway. CZ, STS Information, Society, 
and Culture across disciplines. How all aspects of information theory and practice, including computational 
and mathematical and those from social sciences and the humanities are transforming research, reframing 
intellectual questions in research and its application, and having an impact on interactions within societies, 
cultures, ideologies, economics, politics. Modules presented by faculty from all areas and schools, contrasting 
and comparative perspectives in research-driven modules focused on interdisciplinary project questions and 
ideas. Lecture/section activities. Course Gateway for the Bass Connections theme in Information, Society and 
Culture. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Philosophy 110, Computer Science 110, Public Policy 110
112. The Googlization of Knowledge: Information, Ethics, and Technology. EI, R, SS, STS Google 
has altered the way we see the world and ourselves. Its biases, valuing popularity over accuracy, affect how 
we value information and navigate news and ideas. This course examines information from different angles 
within the context of social justice, open access to information, and how the Internet and Google affect our 
lives. Themes include knowledge as a public good, Internet policies, data and visual literacies, social media, 
and artificial intelligence. Hands-on work researching how technology affects the access, understanding, and 
reliability of information in students’ lives. Analysis, discussions, and reflection assignments with ongoing 
application to team-based projects. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 112
125L. Foundations of Game Design. Exploration of the theory and practice of game design with a focus 
on critical play, game decomposition, and iterative design. Students explore a range of non-digital games to 
discover how design elements combine to form meaningful systems of play. Readings, discussion, and hands-on 

https://iss.duke.edu/


Information Science + Studies (ISS)  477

design exercises prepare students as they design, develop, and document meaningful games in a collaborative 
environment. Programming experience is not required. Instructor: Miller. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 125L
135. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
135; also C-L: Dance 135
190. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190S. Special Topics in ISS: Introductory Seminar. Topics vary per semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
198. Experimental Interface Design. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 198
209. 3D Modeling and Animation. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 209
211. Animated Film: A History and Aesthetic. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 328
212S. Global Digital Media: Critical and Comparative Approaches to Information Technologies. 
ALP, CCI, R, SS, STS Responding to recent trends in digital-media related fields, this course draws upon 
critical concepts and comparative approaches that deal with contemporary information and communication 
technologies (ICTs) across national and disciplinary boundaries. This course will develop Media Studies and 
Science & Technology Studies inspired analyses that connect the medium-specific and aesthetic qualities of 
digital media with historical and socioeconomic factors shaping their production, circulation, and reception. 
It examines how digital media reproduce or complicate physical and social boundaries, and how concepts of 
race, gender, and class are embedded in the operation of digital technologies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 210S
214S. Media Theory. STS One course. C-L: see Literature 317S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 328S
240A. Fundamentals of Web-Based Multimedia Communications. ALP, R Same as ISS 240. Offered 
through the Duke-In-Venice Program. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 288A
240L. Fundamentals of Web-Based Multimedia Communications. ALP, R Laboratory version 
of Information Science + Studies 240. Multimedia information systems, including presentation media, 
hypermedia, graphics, animation, sound, video, and integrated authoring techniques; underlying technologies 
that make them possible. Practice in the design innovation, programming, and assessment of web-based digital 
multimedia information systems. Intended for students in non-technical disciplines. Engineering or Computer 
Science students should take Engineering 206 or Computer Science 408. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 288L
240S. Fundamentals of Web-Based Multimedia Communications. R Multimedia information 
systems, including presentation media, hypermedia, graphics, animation, sound, video, and integrated 
authoring techniques; underlying technologies that make them possible. Practice in the design innovation, 
programming, and assessment of web-based digital multimedia information systems. Intended for students in 
non-technical disciplines. Engineering or Computer Science students should take Engineering 206 or Computer 
Science 408. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 288S
241L. Web Project Design and Development. QS Follow-on to ISS 240/240L. Students should be 
experienced with basic HTML and CSS. Information and graphic design; use-case development; readings and 
group critiques. Continued work with HTML, CSS, HTML5, Javascript. Introduction to PHP, MySQL and/or 
other server-based authoring techniques. Creation and templating of blogs, wikis, and content management 
systems. Web 2.0 and 3.0 technology implementation. Embedded media and objects. Intellectual property and 
fair use. User testing. Short exercises, group work, individual semester project, and public site launch. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 257L
242. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 240; also C-L: Literature 249, Visual and Media Studies 214, International Comparative Studies 
265, Political Science 248
242S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 240S; also C-L: Literature 249S, Political Science 248S, International Comparative 



 Information Science + Studies (ISS) 478

Studies 265S, Cultural Anthropology 440S, Visual and Media Studies 214S
250. Building Global Audiences. STS One course. C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 250; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 249
255. Humanities Text Mining and Meaning. ALP, R, SS, STS The digital text has led to new forms 
of research and is receiving increasing attention from artificial intelligence (AI). The application of machine 
learning to text, known as text mining, presents unique intellectual challenges that require major contributions 
from the humanities. This course introduces students to the interdisciplinary domain of text mining through 
a humanities-based media-theoretic framework. Students will first learn text data prep skills and practices 
fundamental to meaningful analysis. The semester will later introduce unsupervised machine learning and topic 
modeling, and culminate in a group project. Not recommended for advanced CS students. Instructor: Herron. 
One course.
262. The 21st Century Student: Open Knowledge and Education Innovation. SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 262; also C-L: Education 262
268. Media History: Old and New. ALP, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 266
270S. Constructing Immersive Virtual Worlds. STS Theory, practice, and creation of 3D virtual 
worlds. Hands-on design and development of online collaborative simulation environments. Introduction to 
graphics workflow for creating virtual world media assets. Critical exploration of state-of-the-art virtual world 
technologies; 3D graphics, chat, voice, video, and mixed reality systems. Topics include: history/culture of 
virtual worlds, identity and avatars; behavioral norms; self-organizing cultures; user-generated content, virtual 
world economies; architectural scalability. Instructor: Wendell. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 270S
275. Performance Art History and Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 344; also 
C-L: Literature 222, Theater Studies 235, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 276
279S. Visual Cultures of Medicine. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 346S
285S. Religion and Technology. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Religion 285S
290. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
291. ISS Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a 
previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic 
product. Consent of both the instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
291-1. Independent Study. Half-Credit Independent Study in Information Science + Studies. Instructor: 
Szabo. Half course.
292. ISS Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a 
previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic 
product. Consent of both the instructor and director of undergraduate studies is required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
293. ISS Research Independent Study. R Individual research directed study in a field of special interest on 
a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic 
product. Consent of both the instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
294L. Interactive Graphics: Critical Code. ALP, QS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 242L; also C-L: 
Policy Journalism and Media Studies
302. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320, Visual and Media Studies 324, Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 402
302S. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 302S; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320S, Visual and Media Studies 349S, Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 402S



Information Science + Studies (ISS)  479

305L. Virtual Museums: Theories and Methods of Twenty-First-Century Museums. ALP, R, 
STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 332L; also C-L: Classical Studies 240L
307. Idealistic Nature: The Literature, Philosophy, and Cognition of Ecology. ALP, CZ, EI We 
are dependent on our environment for survival. But what is “the environment”? This course explores the roots 
of our understanding of nature and how this understanding is implicated in our social and ethical, as well 
as ecological, relationships. We consider the debate over the start of the anthropocene—when does human 
activity begin to substantially affect our planet?—within the context of the long intellectual history of Western 
conceptions of “man” and “nature.” We start with ancient, medieval, and Renaissance notions of the cosmos; 
then trace the emergence of mechanistic views of the universe; and end by focusing on representations of nature 
in documentaries such as Planet Earth. Instructor: Giugni. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
347, English 355, Visual and Media Studies 347
315. Mapping History with Geographic Information Systems. CZ, STS Beginner/intermediate 
Geographic Information System (GIS) course designed to help students learn how to investigate history 
spatially. Emphasizes perspectives, procedures, and tools that are relevant to applications of GIS in Art History 
and Humanistic disciplines. Designed as a hybrid lecture/lab format in which direct instruction is supplemented 
by hands on learning labs using ArcGIS software and real-world spatial data. The main skills students will gain 
are: integration of spatial and tabular data, geoprocessing, data visualization, creating features, editing features, 
vector and raster integration, spatial analysis, georeferencing. Instructor: Triplett. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 304, Art History 315
320. Introduction to Programming and User Interface Design in Unity 3D. STS Practical concepts 
and exercises with the C# programming language. Basic concepts of algorithms and data structures. Discussion 
of basic computer graphics concepts. Introduction to the Unity3D game engine. Importing various model 
formats into Unity3D. User interface design in Unity3D. Advanced scripting using C# for Unity3D. Unity3D 
common pitfalls and tips for optimizations. Usage of the MiddleVR virtual reality library. Weekly homework and 
final project. No prior coding experience is assumed. Instructor: Zielinski. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 326
320S. Introduction to Programming and User Interface Design in Unity 3D. STS Practical concepts 
and exercises with the C# programming language. Basic concepts of algorithms and data structures. Discussion 
of basic computer graphics concepts. Introduction to the Unity3D game engine. Importing various model 
formats into Unity3D. User interface design in Unity3D. Advanced scripting using C# for Unity3D. Unity3D 
common pitfalls and tips for optimizations. Usage of the MiddleVR virtual reality library. Weekly homework and 
final project. No prior coding experience is assumed. Instructor: Zielinski. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 326S
323S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 
320S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 247S, International Comparative Studies 320S, Latin 
American Studies 320S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
323S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 318S, Human Rights
351S. Digital Storytelling and Interactive Narrative. ALP, STS, W Digital storytelling methodologies, 
theory, and practice. In-depth analysis of digital storytelling in various media forms and modes of production. 
Cultural impact of new media narratives. Exploration of digital storytelling affordances and approaches: text, 
video, audio, design, animation, and interactivity. Critical analysis of existing media and remediation of older 
media forms. Experimentation with non-linear, spatial, ludic, and hypermedia approaches. Questions of 
authorship, agency, authority, and collaboration in blogs, games, fan fiction, adaptations. Hands-on experience 
developing digital narratives and creating digital critiques. Analytical paper and regular crits. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 357S, Literature 352S
351SA. Digital Storytelling. ALP, STS, W Digital storytelling methodologies, theory, and practice. In-depth 
analysis of digital storytelling in various media forms and modes of production. Cultural impact of new media 
narratives. Exploration of digital storytelling affordances: text, video, audio, design, animation, and interactivity. 
Hands-on experience developing digital narratives and creating digital critiques. Course taught in Venice, Italy. 
No specific digital media authoring experience required. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 357SA, Literature 352SA
354S. Web Design and Narrative: Artists, Documentarians, Art Historians, and Entrepreneurs. 



 Information Science + Studies (ISS) 480

ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 354S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 364S, Visual Arts 
364S
355S. Computer Game Design and Development. ALP Surveys history, technology, narrative, ethics, 
and design of interactive computer games. Games as systems of rules, games of emergence and progression, 
state machines. Game flow, games as systems of pleasure, goals, rewards, reinforcement schedules, fictional 
and narrative elements of game worlds. Students work in teams to develop novel game-design storyboards 
and stand-alone games. Exploration of the interplay between narrative, graphics, rule systems, and artificial 
intelligence in the creation of interactive games. Programming experience not required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 355S
356S. Digital Durham. ALP, R, STS, W Representing Durham past and present with digital media. Digitize 
historical and cultural materials, research in archives and public records and present information through 
various forms including web pages, databases, maps, video and other media. Analysis of social impact of new 
representations of place and space. Instructor: Abel. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 358S, Education 
356S, History 382S
360. The History of the Book. ALP, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 360; also C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 346, History 367
366L. Theories and Practices of Data Visualization. R, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 366L
376. Performance and Technology: Composition Workshop. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Dance 
308; also C-L: Theater Studies 364, Electrical and Computer Engineering 364
380S. Visualizing Cities: Representing Urban Landscapes, Cultures, and Environments. ALP, 
CZ, R, STS Visualizing cities in theory and practice. Exploring digital and visual representation of landscapes, 
structures, environments, history, culture, architecture, events, and populations. Change over time, cultural 
heritage, possible futures, and alternate pasts from historical, cultural, documentary, and scientific evidence 
and archives. The idea of the city as a conceptual category and metaphor. Ubiquitous computing in urban 
environments as a medium for interaction. Global cities and diaspora. Visual imagery and written accounts. 
Use of mapping, imaging, 3D, augmented reality, games. Individual and group research and production of 
visualizing cities projects. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 380S
380SA. Digital Cities and the Cartographic Imagination. CZ, R, STS Digital Cities in theory and 
practice. Exploring digital representation of history, culture, architecture, events, and populations. Change 
over time, prospective modeling of possible futures and alternate pasts. Ubiquitous computing in urban 
environments. Global cities and diaspora. Use of mapping, imaging, 3D, augmented reality, games. Individual 
and group digital city projects. Taught in Duke in Venice Program. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 380SA
390. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary per semester. Information science 
and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. Theoretical readings 
coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics 
differ each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Seminar version of ISS 390. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390S-1. Topics in Digital History and Humanities. One course. C-L: see History 390S-1; also C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 390S-1
390SA. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Seminar version of Information Science + 
Studies 390. Instructor: Staff. One course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390T. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies: Tutorial. Topics vary per semester. 
Information science and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. 
Theoretical readings coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.



Information Science + Studies (ISS)  481

391. Bass Connections in Information Science and Culture: Independent Study Project. Bass 
Connections Information Science and Culture related, individual non-research directed study in a field of 
special interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member affiliated with Bass 
Connections, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. Consent of both the instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395T. Syrian Refugee Crisis, Photojournalism, and Social Media Tutorial. ALP, QS This is a 
research-project-centered tutorial that will build on a Summer 2017 Data+ project (https://bigdata.duke.edu/
projects/visualizing-suffering-tracking-photojournalism-and-syrian-refugee-crisis). Constructing their own 
research questions, students will analyze the AP database photographic images of the Syrian Refugee Crisis and 
how they are distributed via media outlets. This tutorial will help students think through questions surrounding 
the links between visual and textual interpretation, copyrights problems, and ethics. The data analysis 
component of the project will ask students to learn how to use image search software and to apply statistical 
analysis tools. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Guigni. One course.
396. Graphic Design in Multimedia: Theory and Practice. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 223
425. Intellectual Property and Innovation: Law, Policy & Entrepreneurship. EI, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Markets and Management Studies 425; also C-L: Sociology 425, Economics 295, Public Policy 
425
435S. Chinese Media and Popular Culture: Politics, Ideology, and Social Change. CCI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 435S; also C-L: Political Science 435S, International 
Comparative Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
436. Experimental Sculpture and Installation Art. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
434; also C-L: Dance 435
490. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary per semester. Information science 
and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. Theoretical readings 
coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Seminar version of Information Science + 
Studies 490. One course.
490S-1. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary per semester. Information science 
and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. Theoretical readings 
coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Primarily for Information Science + 
Studies certificate students. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. ISS Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a 
previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic 
product. Consent of both the instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
493. ISS Research Independent Study. R Individual research directed study in a field of special interest 
on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or 
artistic product. Consent of both the instructor and director of graduate studies is required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
495S. Research Capstone. R, SS Course limited to ISS certificate students. Students plan, research, and 
create new technology projects designed to facilitate interdisciplinary collaborative research, synthesizing 
their coursework in the program. Discussion sections meet weekly to discuss project goals and progress, learn 
principles of effective research project management, interdisciplinary collaboration, and ethical conduct 
research. Instructor: Szabo. One course.
496. Experiential Research Capstone. R Students plan, research, and create new technology projects 
designed to facilitate interdisciplinary collaborative research, synthesizing and building upon their co-curricular 
experiences in the program. Discussion sections meet weekly to discuss project goals and progress, learn 



 Information Science + Studies (ISS) 482

principles of effective research project management, interdisciplinary collaboration, and ethical conduct of 
research. Course limited to ISS students who are enrolled in the experiential certificate program. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Szabo. One course.
510S. How They Got Game: History and Culture of Interactive Simulations and Video Games. 
ALP, STS History and cultural impact of interactive simulations and video games. Evolution of computer 
and video game design from its beginnings to the present: storytelling, strategy, simulation, sports, 3D first-
person games. Cultural, business, and technical perspectives. Insights into design, production, marketing, and 
socio-cultural impacts of interactive entertainment and communication. Students should have a dual processor 
implant with 1TB of VRAM. Instructor: Lenior. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 566S 
535. Chinese Media and Pop Culture. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
535; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies
540S. Technology and New Media: Academic Practice. SS, STS How information technology and new 
media transform knowledge production in academic practice through hands-on work. Critique of emergent 
digital culture as it impacts higher education; assessing impact of integrating such tools into scholarly work and 
pedagogical practice. Modular instruction with guest specialists assisting with information technology tools 
and media authorship theory. Topics may include: web development, information visualization, time-based 
media, databases, animations, virtual worlds and others. Theoretical readings; hands-on collaboration; ongoing 
application to individual student projects. Knowledge of basic web development, personal computer access 
recommended. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Art History 536S, Visual and Media Studies 562S
544L. Introduction to Digital Archaeology. CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 544L; also 
C-L: Art History 547L
550SL. Digital Publishing: Concepts and Practice. CZ, R, STS Seminar cultivating theoretical, critical, 
and historical understanding of scholarly publishing through study of contemporary digital publishing and 
related issues in the digital humanities. Themes include markers of authorship and authority; contextual 
influences on interpretation; theories of audience. Hands-on work researching and building an openly 
accessible, web-based scholarly resource. Guest lecturers providing insight into current legal, technical, and 
ethical issues in digital publishing. Theoretical readings; analysis, critique, and reflection assignments; team-
based discussion and collaboration; ongoing application to individual student projects. Instructors: Janiak, 
Milewicz. One course. C-L: Philosophy 550SL
551SL. Advanced Digital Art History: New Representational Technologies. ALP, CZ, STS One 
course. C-L: see Art History 551SL
552. Creative Industries and the Urban Environment. SS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 542
555S. Physical Computing. QS, STS One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 564S; also C-L: Computational Media, 
Arts & Cultures 564S
560S. Debates in the Digital Humanities: Multi-Disciplinary Theory and Practice. ALP, 
STS Digital humanities theory and criticism. Debates around nature of digital humanities, relationship to 
other disciplines and approaches. Multimodal modes of knowledge production in the digital era for humanists. 
Global DH, postcolonial DH, DH versus new media studies. Authoring and critiquing born digital projects and 
applications. Hands-on use of digital media hardware and software in combination with theoretical and critical 
readings for content analysis of text, images, audio, video and to create digital archives, databases, websites, 
environments, maps, apps, simulations, and games. Independent digital projects plus critical papers. Graduate 
focus on personal research applications. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 550S
565S. New Media, Memory, and the Visual Archive. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 565S; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies
575S. Generative Media Authorship - Music, Text & Image. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 575S; 
also C-L: Music 575S, Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 575S
580S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 1. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Art History 
580S; also C-L: Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 580S
581S. Historical and Cultural Visualization Proseminar 2. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Art History 



Information Science + Studies (ISS)  483

581S; also C-L: Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 581S
590. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary per semester. Information science 
and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. Theoretical readings 
coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Information Science + Studies. Topics vary per semester. Information science 
and studies areas as understood historically, thematically, and in contemporary cultures. Theoretical readings 
coupled with hands-on work with technology and new media applications. Instructor: Staff. One course.
591. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of both the instructor and director of graduate studies is required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
591-1. Independent Study. Half-credit independent study in Information Science + Studies. Individual non-
research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously approved topic, under the supervision of a 
faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. Consent of both the instructor and director of 
graduate studies is required. Instructor: Staff.
592. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic product. 
Consent of both the instructor and director of graduate studies is required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
613S. Computational Media Studio in Advanced Digital Practice. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see 
Historical and Cultural Visualization 613S; also C-L: Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 613S
615S. Comparative Media Studies. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 625S; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 625S
624S. Post-Digital Architecture. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Literature 624S
630S. Phenomenology and Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 630S; also C-L: 
Art History 630S, Visual and Media Studies 630S
632S. Whitehead, Bergson, James. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 632S; also C-L: Art 
History 632S, Visual and Media Studies 632S
640. The History and Future of Higher Education. CCI, CZ, SS, STS Examination of the long history, 
from Socrates forward, of debates on meaning, purpose, and access to higher education, with special emphasis 
on the role of humanistic, critical thinking as foundational to all aspects of higher education. Primary focus on 
Western tradition of postsecondary education, plus a look at different international and alternative models, 
including apprenticeship, vocational and skills training, monastic training, community-based learning, lifelong 
learning, and online peer-to-peer open learning. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
650S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar. ALP, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 650S; also C-L: Literature 621S, Art History 537S, Visual and Media 
Studies 561S, Policy Journalism and Media
660S. Digital Places and Spaces: Mirror, Hybrid, and Virtual Worlds. ALP, SS, STS History, 
theory, criticism, practice of creating digital places and spaces with maps, virtual worlds, and games. Links 
to “old,” analog media. Virtual environment and world-building and historical narrative, museum, mapping, 
and architectural practices. Project-based seminar course w/ critical readings, historical and contemporary 
examples, world-building. Class exhibitions, critiques, and ongoing virtual showcase. Projects might include: 
web and multimedia, GPS and handheld data and media capture, 2D & 3D mapping, screen-based sims and 
game-engine based development, sensors and biometrics, and multimodal, haptic interfaces. Instructor: Szabo. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 660S
662S. Mapping Culture: Geographies of Space, Mind, and Power. ALP, CZ, STS History and practice 
of mapping as cultural practice and technique of world-building and historical and cultural representation. 
Emphasis on interplay of cartographic imagination, lived experience, historical and narrative power. Readings 
in mapping history, critical cartography, pyscho-geography, art maps, cognitive mapping, network maps, 
and spatial theory as well as contemporary approaches and critiques to maps, culture, politics. Exploration of 
map-based visualizations as narrative/argumentative devices. Hands-on work with geographical information 



 Information Science + Studies (ISS) 484

systems, digital mapping tools, data viz, and digital storytelling systems. Theory/practice seminar culminating 
in a final research project. Instructor: Szabo. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 662S
666S. (Neosentience) Body as Electrochemical Computer. ALP, NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see 
Visual Arts 510S
670. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America. 
ALP, CCI, STS Influence of new medical technologies (organ transplantation, VR surgery, genetic engineering, 
nano-medicine, medical imaging, DNA computing, neuro-silicon interfaces) on the American imagination from 
WWII to the current decade. Examines the thesis that these dramatic new ways of configuring bodies have 
participated in a complete reshaping of the notion of the body in the cultural imaginary and a transformation 
of our experience of actual human bodies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Literature 623, Philosophy 570, 
Science & Society
680S. Information Archeology: Studies in the Nature of Information and Artifact in the Digital 
Environment. SS, STS Interdisciplinary exploration of the nature of artifact and evidence, information and 
knowledge embedded in structured and unstructured digital data. Critical analysis, research and technology 
labs focus on societal and technological implications of data warehousing, Internet archives, analog to digital 
conversion, data recovery, and identity theft and management. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 
542S, Visual and Media Studies 569S
691. Independent Study. Individual directed study in a field of special interest on a previously approved 
topic, under the supervision of a faculty member. Consent of the instructor is required. Instructor: Staff. 
Variable credit.
695T. Advanced Tutorial - Information Science + Studies. ALP, SS Advanced undergraduate and 
graduate tutorial under the supervision of a faculty member or members for two or more students working on 
related projects. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Other Courses
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
122. Islamic Civilization I
240S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games
Biology
665. Bayesian Inference for Environmental Models
Computer Science
94. Programming and Problem Solving
201. Data Structures and Algorithms
308. Advanced Software Design and Implementation
316. Introduction to Database Systems
342S. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet
356. Computer Network Architecture
370D. Introduction to Artificial Intelligence
555. Probability for Electrical and Computer Engineers
Cultural Anthropology
256. Islamic Civilization I
419S. Global Environmentalism and the Politics of Nature
440S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games
Documentary Studies
135S. Introduction to Audio Documentary
209S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth
310S. The Short Audio Documentary
367S. Video Journalism
Economics
208D. Introduction to Econometrics
361. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
361D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
Education
209S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth
Electrical and Computer Engineering
350L. Digital Systems
356. Computer Network Architecture
383. Introduction to Robotics and Automation
488. Digital Image and Multidimensional Processing
555. Probability for Electrical and Computer Engineers
557. Performance and Reliability of Computer Networks



Information Science + Studies (ISS)  485

Environment
665. Bayesian Inference for Environmental Models
History
210. Islamic Civilization I
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
International Comparative Studies
265S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games
Linguistics
208. Philosophy of Mind
250. Symbolic Logic
Literature
249S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games
622. Science Studies
Mathematics
230. Probability
305S. Number Theory
342D. Statistics
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science
442. Introduction to Robotics and Automation
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
268. Islamic Civilization I
Music
273S. Introduction to Electronic Music Composition
274S. Computer Music
Philosophy
210. Knowledge and Certainty
212. Philosophy of Mind
246. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
246D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
250. Symbolic Logic
538S. Problems in the Philosophy and Policy of Genomics
Physics
271L. Electronics
Policy Journalism and Media Studies
365S. Video Journalism
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
Political Science
248S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games
331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
331D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice
388. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
619. Media and Social Change
Public Policy
365S. Video Journalism
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
674. Media and Democracy
676. Media and Social Change
Religion
375. Islamic Civilization I
Russian
516. Media and Social Change
Statistical Science
101L. Data Analysis and Statistical Inference
101LA. Data Analysis and Statistical Inference
102L. Introductory Biostatistics
102LA. Introduction to Biostatistics
111L. Probability and Statistical Inference
130L. Probability and Statistics in Engineering
230. Probability
250D. Statistics
Theater Studies
370S. Moving Image Practice
Visual Arts
206. Digital Imaging
212S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth
326S. Film Animation Production
Visual and Media Studies
206. Digital Imaging
212S. Digital Documentary Photography: Education, Childhood, and Growth



 Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E)486

214S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games
261S. Moving Image Practice
271S. Film Animation Production
302. Philosophy of Mind
305S. Video Journalism
563. Media and Democracy

Innovation and Entrepreneurship
A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The goal of the undergraduate certificate in Innovation and Entrepreneurship is to provide students 

with a pathway to pursue a rigorous cross-disciplinary study of innovation and entrepreneurship that will 
be complementary to any major and enable students to be innovative and entrepreneurial in their pursuit of 
knowledge in service to society. The certificate requires an in-depth course of study examining the theories of 
innovation and entrepreneurship, coupled with hands-on practice in both areas. Innovation and entrepreneurship 
are, by their very nature, areas of cross-disciplinary inquiry, so the certificate will also draw on theory, contexts, 
and methods from across the disciplines.

The certificate builds on the already-existing emphasis of knowledge in service to society that is taking place 
within students’ majors and co-curricular activities, to further enhance students’ abilities to explore the complex 
problems being faced by our world and to develop innovative methods to address those problems. Cultivating 
such an innovative and entrepreneurial spirit will involve students developing the capacities of creativity, 
technical competencies, courage and resilience, reflection, and collaboration, acquired through a comprehensive 
undertaking of research, inquiry, experimentation, and experiential learning. 

In this experiential certificate, students take four courses in the subject areas outlined below, as well as 
complete two experiences and create an e-portfolio. The certificate program elements are:

1. Four course areas:
• Gateway: Innovation, Ideation, and Design
• Keystone: Strategies for Innovation and Entrepreneurship
• Elective: Further Exploration in Innovation and/or Entrepreneurship
• Capstone: Ideas into Action

2. Two thematically-related experiential learning activities. One of the experiences must be at least 300 
hours, and the other must be at least 150 hours.

3. Publicly facing e-portfolio
Sequencing is an important feature of the certificate. Students are required to apply to the certificate by 

the end of the add/drop period in the fall of their junior year. Successful application to the program includes 
four components: a) identification of the four courses and two thematically-related experiences the student 
plans to undertake; b) written essay outlining the logic and rationale for the pathway the student selected; c) 
written essay justifying the student’s desire to pursue the certificate; and d) review, advisory input, and approval 
of the student’s application by the Innovation and Entrepreneurship Certificate Admissions Committee. More 
information and course listings can be found on the website: https://entrepreneurship.duke.edu/education/
certificates/certificate-in-innovation-and-entrepreneurship/. 

Courses in Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E)
89S. Special Topics. Selected special topics in innovation and entrepreneurship. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
140. Create, Innovate, Act: Creativity, Innovation, and Social Action. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Visual and Media Studies 140
171. Business Anthropology: Anthropologists in the Workplace. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 171; also C-L: African & African American Studies 171, International Comparative Studies 171, 
Sociology 171
190SA. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
217SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene). ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
217SA; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 221SA, Dance 279SA, Music 217SA, Markets and Management 
Studies

https://entrepreneurship.duke.edu/education/certificates/certificate-in-innovation-and-entrepreneurs
https://entrepreneurship.duke.edu/education/certificates/certificate-in-innovation-and-entrepreneurs


Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E) 487

242S. Multimedia Documentary: Editing, Production, and Publication. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 360S; also C-L: Visual Arts 357S, Visual and Media Studies 348S
243S. The Art of Improvising. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 242S
250. Building Global Audiences. STS Marketing and publicity are so important to audience building that, 
20 years ago, expanding beyond local audiences usually couldn’t be accomplished without huge advertising 
budgets. However, thanks to the Internet, you can build a global audience from your dorm room. This class 
explores how. Learn about social media, search engine optimization, virality, content marketing, growth 
hacking, and other digital audience building strategies. They’re difficult to learn and time consuming to execute, 
so expect to struggle. We’ll learn as much from our failures as we will from our successes as we discover what it 
takes to cultivate global awareness for an idea without ever leaving Durham. Instructor: Dinin. One course. C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 250, Visual and Media Studies 249
252. Learning to Fail. SS Most people spend their lives afraid of failing. Yet, many of the world’s most 
successful people failed numerous times on their paths toward success. The underlying question of this class 
is if failing is as antithetical to learning as we’re taught to believe. To explore this question, we will test ways of 
using failure as a strategy for learning. We will experiment with failure to learn how it can make us better as 
we develop our skills as innovators, specifically focusing on the earliest stage of creativity: ideation. We will use 
failure through experimentation as a technique for problem definition and needs discovery which, in turn, will 
help us validate the quality of our ideas. Instructor: Dinin, Gould. One course.
253. Social Marketing: From Literary Celebrities to Instagram Influencers. SS, STS Typical 
Duke students spend hours each day using social media. You’ve surely heard the platforms described as 
“revolutionary,” and you’ve also heard them described as “time wasters.” What you probably haven’t thought 
about is how similar they are to previous “revolutionary” communications technologies like novels, newspapers, 
and even language itself. This course explores ways in which studying the masters of previous “social” media 
technologies—the Shakespeares, Whitmans, and Eliots of the world—can help us understand how influencers on 
digital social media leverage the same platforms you use every day to market themselves, build their brands, and 
grow their audiences. Instructor: Dinin. One course. C-L: English 253
261. Social Innovation. EI, SS This course will provide an introduction to the field of social innovation. 
Through readings, classroom discussion, experiential learning, and individual and team assignments, the 
course will provide students with concepts and frameworks for understanding and practicing effective social 
innovation. The course develops a theory of innovation and describes examples of persons and organizations 
demonstrating innovative approaches. We will look at how to innovate effectively and the attributes and skills 
that cultivate such innovation. We will also explore the limitations of social innovation and consider critical 
arguments that the field must address. Department consent required. Instructor: Nash. One course. C-L: Public 
Policy 256
262. The 21st Century Student: Open Knowledge and Education Innovation. SS, STS The term 
“open source” is frequently used to denote software source code that is freely available, modifiable, and 
shareable. However, the term has much wider applicability and relevance. The core values of open source--open 
knowledge and access to information, collaboration and community, transparency and meritocracy, inclusion 
and diversity, and iterative creation and adaptability--have profound implications for 21st century learning. 
In this learner-centered, project-based course, students will research the intersection of open source concepts, 
technology, and education innovation and share their knowledge across public-facing open-access media. 
Instructor: Chernik. One course. C-L: Education 262, Information Science + Studies 262
263S. Entrepreneurial Problem Solving in Global Health. SS Global health, both international and 
local, has a long way to go to support healthy lives. In this class, students will have the opportunity to gain 
understanding of how the Entrepreneurial method can help to improve health. Students will learn about the 
victories and the challenges, and in the end, will be better able to be successful in their future endeavors. 
Students will be challenged, and will have to work, but in the end, they will be proud of their accomplishments 
and newfound knowledge. Instructor: Clements. One course. C-L: Global Health 273S
271A. Building and Sustaining a Successful Enterprise. SS In this Duke in Silicon Valley course, 
students will develop an understanding of the resources, skills, and planning required to launch a new 
product or service. Through lectures, case studies, and visiting talks, the course addresses critical factors such 
as: ideation, competition and competitive advantage, financing requirements, corporate culture, product 



 Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E)488

positioning, customer identification, and market segmentation. Director of undergraduate studies consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 281A, Markets and Management Studies
272S. Documentary and Policy: How Documentary Influences Policy. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 272S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 386S, Public Policy 228S
281. Basics of Technology Commercialization. This course covers assessment, development, and 
translation for a range of technical areas, such as pharmaceuticals, computer science, energy, and medical 
devices. The course is organized around the basic elements of taking technology from conception to 
development and commercialization, including understanding technology, developing a plan to get to market, 
and assessing the potential market. Combines lecture, case assignments, and discussion of real technology 
development opportunities. Instructor: Staff. One course.
282. Overview of Artificial Intelligence (AI). QS, STS Introduces students to the world of Artificial 
Intelligence (AI), focusing on the applications and current capabilities of AI approaches. The course will discuss 
how AI is being used to revolutionize many industries and also the context and challenges associated with AI 
systems. The course will include basic theory behind AI topics including search algorithms, Markov Decision 
Processes (MDPs), game theory, and machine learning. Students will additionally build practical knowledge and 
understanding through basic programming exercises in these areas. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290. Special Topics. Selected topics in innovation and entrepreneurship. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295S. Arts Entrepreneurship. One course. C-L: see Music 295S; also C-L: Dance 201S, Visual and Media 
Studies 295S, Theater Studies 312S, Documentary Studies 295S, Visual Arts 295S
302. Fieldwork Methods: Cultural Analysis and Interpretation. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Cultural Anthropology 302
310S. Non-Profit Cultural Institutions. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 310S; also C-L: 
Economics 247S, Visual and Media Studies 329S, Public Policy 318S, Dance 208S
311S. Legal Issues for the Performing Arts. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 311S; also C-L: 
Public Policy 363S, Economics 223S, Dance 379S
315A. Language and Culture of Entrepreneurship in Latin America. CCI, CZ, FL Two courses. C-L: 
see Spanish 315A
316SA. stARTup Project. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 316SA; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 315SA, Dance 307SA, Music 316SA, Markets and Management Studies
352. Strategies for Innovation and Entrepreneurship. SS Course covers component elements of 
developing skills needed to launch a venture. Starting at the point of need identification, course covers lean 
methodology; innovation and entrepreneurship strategy; creating needed financing and resource structures; 
effectively marketing/communicating innovation and its associated benefits; leading, managing, and working 
effectively within teams; creating a positive and ethical work culture; and evaluating success. Materials for class 
discussion are case studies and readings. Instructor: Amato. One course.
359A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey (Service-Learning). ALP, 
CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 359A; also C-L: Literature 230A, Documentary Studies 
359A
373. Intellectual Property: Law, Policy, and Practice. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 
373; also C-L: Markets and Management Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
375. The Economics of Entrepreneurship. SS One course. C-L: see Economics 375
390. Advanced Special Topics. Selected advanced topics in innovation and entrepreneurship. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Advanced Special Topics Seminar. Selected advanced topics in innovation and entrepreneurship. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study in Innovation and Entrepreneurship. Directed reading or individual projects 
under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. 



Innovation and Entrepreneurship (I&E) 489

Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study in Innovation and Entrepreneurship. R Individual research under 
the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
395. New Ventures 2: Strategy Development. Student teams develop core elements of a strategy for a 
technology or business idea; detail will be suitable for a business plan document for a company seeking initial 
investment; strategy will serve as a foundation for a first operating plan for company. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Fjeld. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies 395, Markets and Management 
Studies
396. New Ventures 3: Operating Plan. Students develop full operating plans for a new venture, including 
a finance plan; detail will be suitable for a business plan document for a company seeking initial investment; 
plan should be fundable upon completion; teams follow a structured process in doing their analysis and making 
recommendations; students work with faculty advisors and business mentors. Students should have completed 
Markets and Management Studies 395. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Fjeld. One course. C-L: Markets 
and Management Studies 396, Markets and Management Studies
447. Philosophical and Conceptual Problems of Entrepreneurship. SS One course. C-L: see 
Philosophy 447; also C-L: Economics 346
499. Innovation and Entrepreneurship Capstone: Ideas into Action. SS In this course, students bring 
together interdisciplinary insights from their work throughout the Innovation & Entrepreneurship Certificate 
program to shed light on innovation and entrepreneurship and the roles they play in addressing the world’s 
most pressing problems. The class will incorporate rich discussion, selected readings, and guest speakers 
addressing topics in innovation and entrepreneurship. Students will focus on applying what they have learned 
through the certificate curriculum to develop an innovation and entrepreneurship capstone project. Director of 
undergraduate studies consent required. Instructor: Dinin. One course.
499D. Innovation and Entrepreneurship Capstone: Ideas into Action. SS In this course, students 
bring together interdisciplinary insights from their work throughout the Innovation & Entrepreneurship 
Certificate program to shed light on innovation and entrepreneurship and the roles they play in addressing the 
world’s most pressing problems. The class will incorporate rich discussion, selected readings, and guest speakers 
addressing topics in innovation and entrepreneurship. Students will focus on applying what they have learned 
through the certificate curriculum to develop an innovation and entrepreneurship capstone project. Director of 
undergraduate studies consent required. Instructor: Dinin. One course.
510. Social Innovation Practicum. In the Social Innovation Practicum, students will engage with social 
entrepreneurs and other practitioners to learn about and support the design, development, validation, 
assessment, and scaling up of innovative, sustainable approaches to addressing critical social and environmental 
problems in Durham and around the world. Working in multidisciplinary teams, students will gather and 
analyze data, develop recommendations, formulate implementation plans, and provide other capacity-building 
support to clients that may include domestic and international social entrepreneurs, social enterprises, funders, 
public sector innovators and policy makers, and corporate social impact managers. Instructor: Bloom, Nash. 
One course. C-L: Public Policy 511
590. Special Topics in Innovation & Entrepreneurship. Selected topics in innovation and 
entrepreneurship. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

International Comparative Studies
Professor Ching, Director; Associate Professor of the Practice Mathers, Associate Director, Director of Under-
graduate Studies, and Coordinator of the Distinction Program; Associate Professor of the Practice Rosenblatt; 
Assistant Professors of the Practice Harris and Namakkal; Program Committee: A diverse community of faculty 
from across Trinity Arts & Sciences

A major, but not a minor, is available in this program.
The International Comparative Studies Program offers a bachelor of arts degree to students interested in an 



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)490

interdisciplinary individualized major focused on global and transnational studies. The ICS Program mission is 
to prepare lifelong learners who can live, work, and thoughtfully engage with people and problems in a complex, 
diverse, and interconnected world. ICS majors gain knowledge in the culture(s), history, politics, and language of 
one geographic region of the world through region and foreign language coursework. This multidimensional study 
of a particular part of the world is complemented by an examination of transnational dynamics through core and 
comparative coursework in global studies. Well over 75 percent of ICS majors complete some of their coursework 
in study away programs. Core courses, individualized advising, and research mentoring encourage ICS students 
to formulate and address questions through a variety of disciplinary approaches.

The courses listed on the following pages include only ICS core and global courses. The most up-to-date 
listings of approved global and region courses is always available on the ICS website under “Courses.” 

Courses in International Comparative Studies (ICS)
89S. First Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Cultural Anthropology. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 101
101D. Introduction to Cultural Anthropology. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
101D
102. Introduction to Dance. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Dance 101
103. AIDS and Other Emerging Diseases. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 154; also C-L: Global 
Health 154, Global Health
104. Anthropology and Film. SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 130; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 130, Documentary Studies 
105S. Migration and Human Rights in Korea: Local and Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 178S; also C-L: Religion 180S
106. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201; also C-L: African & African American Studies 104, Literature 243, 
Spanish 160
106S. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201S; also C-L: Literature 243S, Spanish 160S, African & African American 
Studies 104S
108. Religions of Asia. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 175; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 115
110. Introduction to African Studies (DS3 or DS4). ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 103; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 105, History 129, Political Science 108
111. Traditions in Documentary Studies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 101; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 103
113. Introduction to Human Rights: Gateway for the Human Rights Certificate. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 104; also C-L: Public Policy 162, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 104, Human Rights
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science. CCI, CZ, STS One 
course. C-L: see History 106; also C-L: Science & Society 118, Energy and the Environment, Ethics Elective, 
Science & Society
121. Introduction to Contemporary Latin America. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 121; also C-L: 
Latin American Studies 121
122. History of Latinxs in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 122; also C-L: 
Latin American Studies 122, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 122, Latin American Studies, Latino/a 
Studies in the Global South
123. Private Wealth and Public Giving: A Modern History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 123; also C-L: Public Policy 177, Study of Ethics 123
128FS. Human Rights and World Politics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 129FS; also C-L: 

https://internationalcomparative.duke.edu/


International Comparative Studies (ICS) 491

Political Science 176FS, Public Policy 181FS, Human Rights
144. Introduction to East Asian Cultures: Narrating East Asia through Word and Image. ALP, 
CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 107
152S. Gateway Seminar: History at Sea. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 152S
153FS. Borderline Humans: How Walls (and Bridges) Define Us. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Documentary Studies 153FS; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 153FS
157S. Gateway Seminar: Empires in Historical Perspective. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 157S
160. Islam. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 160; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 160, 
Islamic Studies
163S. Gateway Seminar: Gandhi, King, Mandela. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 163S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 163S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 177S
164S. Gateway Seminar - Antisemitism: Ethnicity, Race, Religion, Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see History 164S
166S. Gateway Seminar - Anarchism and its Discontents. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see History 
166S
169. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170; also C-L: Sociology 160, Linguistics 170, Visual and Media Studies 170
170. Muslim World: Transformations and Continuities. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 250; also C-L: Religion 380, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
171. Business Anthropology: Anthropologists in the Workplace. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 171; also C-L: African & African American Studies 171, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 171, 
Sociology 171
173S. Gateway Seminar: We All Want to Change the World: Writing the History of Good 
Intentions. CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see History 173S
179S. Gateway Seminar: Capitalism & Its Critics. CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see History 179S
183S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 183S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 187S, African & African American Studies 133S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 183S, Public Policy 175S, Human Rights
188S. Gateway Seminar: The Price of Sex: Gender and the Global Political Economy. CZ, EI, R, 
SS, W One course. C-L: see History 188S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 188S
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in International Comparative 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Selected Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from 
semester to semester, focusing either on specific world regions or particular comparative/global issues. Open 
only to students in the FOCUS Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Selected Topics in International Comparative Studies. Seminar version of International 
Comparative Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
195. Comparative Approaches to Global Issues. CCI, CZ, SS, W Introduction to critical transnational 
studies through several disciplinary approaches. Examines capitalism and neo-liberal globalization and their 
relationships to culture, politics, economics, and other social forms and outcomes; considers transnationalism 
“from below”; addresses linear and Western-centric thinking about progress and modernity; focuses a historical 
lens on political discourses, institutions, and projects to understand them contextually; demonstrates how 
cultures and identities are dynamically constituted in interaction with historical, material, political, and 
situational factors; considers how different inequalities and contestations inflect most social formations. 
Instructor: Harris, Mathers, Namakkal, or Rosenblatt. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 195, History 103, 
Political Science 110, Sociology 195, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 195, Marxism and Society



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)492

203. Gender and Culture. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 271; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 217, Study of Sexualities, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
204D. Soccer Politics. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Romance Studies 362D; also C-L: History 266D
205. Understanding the Middle East. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 105
206. Pigging Out: The Cultural Politics of Food. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 352; also C-L: Sociology 374
207. Gender and Language. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 364; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
232, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 232, Linguistics 364
208. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369; also C-L: Global Health 208, History 249, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
369
208S. Transnational Feminism. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 369S; also C-L: Global Health 208S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 369S, 
History 249S
209S. The Atlantic Slave Trade. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 316S; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 217S, Latin American Studies
210. Languages of the World. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 202; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 202, Russian 362
211. The Psychology of Health Behavior Change. SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 211; also C-L: 
Global Health 261
212. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Italian 220; also C-L: 
German 243, Literature 244, English 244, Jewish Studies 243
213S. Comparative Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
235S; also C-L: Public Policy 285S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 235S, African & 
African American Studies 234S
214. Dance and Religion in Asia and Africa. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 367; also C-L: 
Religion 244, African & African American Studies 222
215. Gender in Dance and Theatre. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 368; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 212, Theater Studies 236
216. Gender and Socialism. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 202; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 216
217S. Geopolitics and Culture: Islamic States from the Ottomans to ISIS. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 208S; also C-L: Public Policy 213S, History 379S
218. Modern & Global India. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 218; also C-L: Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 357
219D. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 382D; also 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 277D, Ethics Elective
219S. Global Art Since 1945. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 381S; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 277S
221S. Africa before Colonialism. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 317S; also C-L: History 341S
222S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 295S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 295S, Religion 295S, Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 296S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 295S, Human Rights
223. African Art: From Royal Court to Contemporary Marketplace. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Art History 345; also C-L: African & African American Studies 348



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 493

224A. The Cognitive Science of Religion and Morality. CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 
232A; also C-L: Religion 281A, Turkish 232A
225SA. Politics and Culture Between Europe and the Middle East. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 381SA; also C-L: Public Policy 386SA, History 378SA
226. The Black Atlantic. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 383; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 329
227S. Performance and Social Change. ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Dance 207S; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 204S
228FS. The Politics of Language. SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 215FS; also C-L: 
Political Science 185FS, Linguistics 213FS
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding. 
CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Environment 216S; also C-L: Public Policy 279S, Political Science 367S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 229S, Islamic Studies, Marine Science and Conservation, 
Human Rights
230. Stimulants and Society. CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 225
231D. Modern Architecture. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 285D
232. Latin American Wars of Independence. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 264; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 264, Political Science 257, Latin American Studies
233S. Civil Society and Civic Engagement in the Arab World: Theories and Practices. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS, W One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 420S
237. Europe in the Twentieth Century. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 286
237. Drugs, Chemicals, and Health: Histories of Substances in Economies, Environments, and 
Bodies. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 235; also C-L: Global Health 235
239. The Anthropology of Race. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 208; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 251, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 208, Human 
Rights
240. What Is Europe?. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 201; also C-L: Literature 273
241. Cyborgs. CCI, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 213; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 215
242S. Nigeria: A Modern History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 285S; 
also C-L: History 217S
243. Dance and Dance Theater of Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 356; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 233, Religion 241, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 246
244S. Global Migration and Ethics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 216S; also C-L: 
Study of Ethics 262S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 216S, Human Rights
245S. Photography in Context. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 245S; also C-L: Visual 
Arts 254S, Visual and Media Studies 252S
246S. Sound in Social Life. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 222S; also C-L: 
Music 239S
246SA. Sound in Social Life. ALP, CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 222SA; also 
C-L: Music 239SA
249S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
283S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 283S, History 397S, Islamic Studies
250. Love and Loneliness: What’s Happening to Relationships in the Twenty-First Century?. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 240; also C-L: Sociology 240, Study of Ethics 240
252D. Are Things Getting Better? The Question of Progress in World Affairs. R, SS, W One course. 



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)494

C-L: see Political Science 234D; also C-L: Public Policy 233D
253. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 251; also C-L: 
Jewish Studies 251, Religion 340
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 254; also C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 254, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 254, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
256S. Shamanism and Spirit Possession. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Religion 213S; also 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 214S, History 215S
259. African Music: Sound, History, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Music 236; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 235
260S. Global Stories, Local Issues. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 223S; also 
C-L: Documentary Studies 223S
262. Spies Like Us: Screening Cold War Espionage. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 270; also C-L: Literature 225, Visual and Media Studies 258
263. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
319; also C-L: African & African American Studies 219, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
219, Latin American Studies, Human Rights
264. Graphic Asia: Visual Storytelling and Global Asian/American Networks. ALP, CCI One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 436; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 239
265. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 240; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 242, Literature 249, Visual and Media Studies 214, 
Political Science 248
265S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 240S; also C-L: Literature 249S, Political Science 248S, Cultural Anthropology 440S, 
Visual and Media Studies 214S, Information Science + Studies 242S, Information Science + Studies
266. Ritual, Performance, and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 284; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 284, Dance 284, Visual and Media Studies 285
268. Modern Africa. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 204; also C-L: African & African American 
Studies 210
271. Business Ethics: The Debate Over Corporate Social Responsibility. EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Philosophy 270; also C-L: Study of Ethics 270
272. Human Rights in Theory and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 272; 
also C-L: Public Policy 231, Philosophy 262, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 262, Human 
Rights
274S. Global Men and Masculinities. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 374S; also C-L: Sociology 375S, History 229S, Literature 374S
275. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political 
Science 275
275S. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political 
Science 275S; also C-L: Ethics Elective
276. The Foundations of Modern Terrorism. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 279
278SA. Transnational Muslims in Germany: Politics of Migration, Religion, and Culture. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 380SA; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 323SA, Cultural Anthropology 382SA, Religion 382SA
280. Taboo Markets. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 280; also C-L: Sociology 340
282. Global Bioethics. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Philosophy 281; also C-L: Global Health 241



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 495

283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas. EI, SS This interdisciplinary course explores the 
phenomenon of necroviolence: attacks on the dignity, integrity, and memory of the dead. Cases come from the 
United States, Latin America, and Canada. Topics include the rights of the dead, cultural attitudes towards the 
dead, and the “ambiguous loss” experienced by loved ones of the disappeared. We also explore the activism of 
family members, volunteer cemetery reclamation groups, and forensic scientists who exhume mass graves to 
identify bodies. Students will interact with guest speakers, spend time in a local African American cemetery with 
ties to Duke, and do community work and research on behalf of the marginalized dead. Instructor: Rosenblatt. 
One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 285SL, African & African American Studies 283SL, Latin American 
Studies 283SL, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 283SL, Latin American Studies, Human 
Rights
287. History of the World Wars. CZ, EI, R, STS One course. C-L: see History 287
288S. Trauma and Nostalgia: East European Film in the 21st Century. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 288S; also C-L: Literature 216S, Visual and Media Studies 284S
289S. Nationalism and Exile. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 278S
290. Selected Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from semester to semester, 
focusing either on specific world regions or particular comparative/global issues. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290FS. Selected Topics: International Comparative Studies Program (Focus). Topics vary, focusing 
either on specific world regions or particular comparative/global issues. Open only to students in the Focus 
Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Selected Topics in International Comparative Studies. Seminar version of International 
Comparative Studies 290. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Religion and Race. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Religion 276; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 276
295. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 302; 
also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 302, Science & Society, Human Rights
299. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 341; 
also C-L: Science & Society 341, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 341, Human Rights
302. Global Chinese Cities through Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 233; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 237
303. Introduction to Economic History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 302; also C-L: 
History 306
304. The International Economy, 1850-Present: From Globalization to Globalization. CCI, CZ, 
SS One course. C-L: see Economics 304; also C-L: History 310
305. History of International Financial and Monetary Crises. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Economics 305; also C-L: History 305
306. Africa and Arabia: Cultures, Communities, and Connections. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 304; also C-L: African & African American Studies 306
307S. Political Economy of Financial Crises. SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 315S; also C-L: 
Markets and Management Studies
308. Development and Africa. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 307; 
also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 307, Public Policy 207
309S. Dancing States of Mind: The Self, Social and Political Practice of Dance. ALP, R One course. 
C-L: see Dance 309S; also C-L: Theater Studies 309S, Cultural Anthropology 311S
311S. Poetic Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 311S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 354S
312. Europe’s Colonial Encounter, 1492-1992: Political Economy and International Thought. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 312; also C-L: Ethics Elective



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)496

313D. Crime and the City from Dickens to The Wire. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 
313D; also C-L: African & African American Studies 226D
314S. ICS Theories and Methods: Doing Global Research. CCI, R, SS, W Introduces students 
to interdisciplinary research methods and theories to conduct global research. Students build on concepts 
foundational to global studies by reading about and practicing variety of research methods including archival 
and oral history, interviews, mapping, textual analysis and ethnography. Texts, discussions, and projects focus 
on theoretical frameworks engaging politics of research, approaching global research “from below,” reaching 
underrepresented populations and social groups, exploring connections between power and knowledge. 
Course examines how interdisciplinary research can expand traditional fields of research. Instructor: Mathers, 
Namakkal, or Rosenblatt. One course.
315S. History of Modern Dance, 1880-1950. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Dance 315S
316. East Africa and the World. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
319; also C-L: History 206
317S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab. EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 301S; 
also C-L: Political Science 341S, Public Policy 311S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 301S, 
Markets and Management Studies, Human Rights
318. Visualizing the Caribbean. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
321; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 368, Latin American Studies 321
319. The Modern Caribbean after Emancipation. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 321; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 240, Romance Studies 321, Cultural Anthropology 322
320S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 
320S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 247S, Latin American Studies 320S, Information Science 
+ Studies 323S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 323S, 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 318S, Human Rights
322. Ethnic Conflict. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 227; also C-L: Public Policy 239
323. Mystical Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 322; also C-L: 
Religion 263
324. International Law and International Institutions. CCI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Political 
Science 321
325. Culture and Politics in Latin America. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
243; also C-L: Documentary Studies, Marxism and Society
326. Colonial Latin America. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 326
328. Anthropology of Money. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 350; also C-L: 
Economics 309, Public Policy 306, African & African American Studies 211
329. Latin America Since Independence. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 329
329S. Politics in Violence. R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Political Science 329S; also C-L: Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 329S, Human Rights
330S. Narratives of Migration. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 397S; also C-L: Linguistics 397S, 
Cultural Anthropology 330S
331S. Islamic Media. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 329S; also C-L: 
Religion 379S, Visual and Media Studies 342S
332S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones. CCI, CZ, EI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 
325S; also C-L: Global Health 325S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 325S, Human 
Rights
333S. Storyworlds: The Art, Technology, and Pleasure of Narrative. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 432S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 384S
334. Globalization of Democracy. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 353



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 497

335S. Decolonization: Histories, Meanings, Struggles. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This course explores 
decolonization as an historical event, a category of theoretical analysis, and a series of contemporary social 
movements. Course material will introduce students to the history of decolonization as both idea and event, 
putting global anti-colonial movements of the twentieth century into conversation with contemporary struggles 
for the decolonization of occupied land, institutions, and epistemologies. This interdisciplinary course draws on 
work in history, geography, anthropology, women’s studies, and postcolonial and decolonial Studies. Students 
will also read and research manifestos, memoirs, archival documents, documentary films, oral histories, and 
museum exhibits. Instructor: Namakkal. One course. C-L: History 289S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 335S
336. Chinatowns: A Cultural History. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 335; also C-L: History 228
337. Hollywood and Africa: Case Studies in Filmic Representation. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 337; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 336
338SL. Revolution on Screen: Filming Conflict in the Middle East. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 281SL; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 225SL
339. Latin American Literature in Translation. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 375; also C-L: 
Spanish 361
340. North American Environmental History. CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 345; also C-L: 
Public Policy 278
342S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics. ALP, CCI, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 341S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 238S, Public Policy 380S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 342S, Human Rights
344S. Our Culinary Cultures. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 344S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 258S
345S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 296S; also C-L: Literature 276S, History 283S, Islamic Studies
346S. Illiberal Nondemocracies: Focus on Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 388S; also C-L: History 331S, Political Science 301S, Public Policy 317S
348. Women in the Economy. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 348; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 230
350. International Political Economy. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 222; also C-L: 
Political Science 350
351S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 346S; also C-L: History 396S, Political Science 336S, Public Policy 326S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 349S, Human Rights
352. History of Photography, 1839 to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 303; also C-L: Documentary Studies 303
353. Life and Death: Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
341; also C-L: Global Health 353, Sociology 351
354. Political Economy of Latin America. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 349; also C-L: 
Latin American Studies 349
355S. Refugee Policy and Practice (DukeImmerse). CCI, EI, QS, SS One course. C-L: see Study of 
Ethics 388S; also C-L: Political Science 357S, Public Policy 382S
356S. Istanbul and Berlin. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 383S; also 
C-L: German 283S, History 368S
357S. Globalization and Theater. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 338S; also C-L: 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 338S



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)498

359S. The US Border and its Borderlands. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 216S; 
also C-L: Political Science 343S
360S. Interpreting Bodies: Identity and Beyond. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 363S
361. Violent Jihad in the Twentieth Century - A Global History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
359; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 359, Political Science 382, Public Policy 359
362A. Religion, Security and Global Citizenship in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 326A; also C-L: Religion 371A, Political Science 395A, Public Policy 339A
363A. Globalization and Deglobalization. FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 350A; also C-L: Political 
Science 320A, Economics 320A, Public Policy 356A
364. France and Africa: The Politics and Culture of (Post-)Coloniality. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 380; also C-L: Romance Studies 380, History 372
365S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Religion 219S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 209S, History 225S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 224S, Cultural 
Anthropology 224S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219S
367. Gender and Political Theory. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
365; also C-L: Political Science 383
368S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 350S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 225S, Visual and Media Studies 213S, Cultural Anthropology 262S, 
Public Policy 387S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 350S, Human Rights
369. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Cultural Anthropology 360; also C-L: Literature 361, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 360, Sociology 360
369S. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Cultural Anthropology 360S; also C-L: Literature 361S, Public Policy 358S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
360S, Sociology 360S
370S. Islam in Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 370S; also C-L: History 209S, Religion 378S, 
Islamic Studies
373S. Between Moscow, Beijing and Delhi: Narratives of Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 373S; also C-L: History 216S
377. Contemporary Novel. ALP One course. C-L: see English 377; also C-L: Literature 351
377S. Contemporary Novel. ALP One course. C-L: see English 377S; also C-L: Literature 351S
379. Emerging Markets: Finance, Trade, Institutions and the World Economy. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Economics 379
380S. Islamic Mysticism. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 373S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 373S, Study of Ethics 373S, History 380S, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies
383. The Actress: Celebrity and the Woman. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Russian 383; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 260, Theater Studies 323
389. Buddhism and Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 328; also C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 286
390. Selected Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from semester to semester, 
focusing either on specific world regions or particular comparative/global issues. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in International Comparative 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Selected Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from semester to semester, 
focusing either on specific world regions or particular comparative/global issues. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in International 



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 499

Comparative Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395. Language and Society. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see English 395; also C-L: Linguistics 451, Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 385, Cultural Anthropology 212, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 395, 
Human Rights
396S. Language in Immigrant America. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 396S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 397S, Linguistics 396S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 396S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 396S, Human Rights
397. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 
210; also C-L: Public Policy 330, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 330, Human Rights
398S. Global Humanitarianism. CCI, EI, R, SS This course explores humanitarianism as both a global 
phenomenon and a western model for engaging with the world. It examines the cultural and political conditions 
that make it possible for some people to be saviors and others to require saving. It focuses on the ways 
humanitarian interventions are increasingly as much about alleviating poverty and supporting political change, 
as about responding to crises caused by health epidemics, conflict or war, and environmental disasters. We 
will pay close attention to the impacts of humanitarian interventions good and bad, while critically exploring 
how local agendas and conditions shape and respond to these programs. Instructor: Mathers. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 298S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 298S
399. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 399; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 399, 
Public Policy 223, Markets and Management Studies
403S. Politics and Obligations of Memory. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
403S; also C-L: History 403S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 403S, Human Rights
404. Globalization and Anti-Globalization. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 425; 
also C-L: Markets and Management Studies
404S. Discourse of Disease and Infection. ALP, CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 409S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 238S
406S. Vampire Chronicles: Fantasies of Vampirism in a Cross-Cultural Perspective. ALP, 
CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 413S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 231S, Study of Sexualities 231S
407S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 438S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 438S, Study 
of Sexualities 438S, Visual and Media Studies 438S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 438S, Literature 
438S
408S. Critical Interventions in Middle East Studies and Policy. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 479S; also C-L: Public Policy 417S, History 417S, Literature 417S
409. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)500

SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 409; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 409, 
Sociology 409, Latin American Studies 409
410S. Trauma and Space in Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
410S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 366S
411S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics and Poetics of Knowledge Production. CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 476S; also C-L: Literature 476S, Visual and Media 
Studies 476S, History 448S, Documentary Studies 476S
412S. Capstone Seminar - Globalization: Asia and Asian America. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see History 454S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 407S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 412S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 437S
413S. France-Asia: Cultural Transfers and Translations in a Globalized Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
FL, W One course. C-L: see French 426S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 426S, Literature 426S
415S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 415S; also C-L: Literature 415S, Cultural Anthropology 415S, Visual and Media 
Studies 416S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 415S
417S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
417S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 215S, Visual and Media Studies 417S, Islamic Studies
418S. The Global Caribbean. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
450S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 450S, Sociology 450S, Latin American Studies 450S
419S. Meaning, Mattering, and Black Being-in-the-World: Towards a Critical Theory of Race 
and Value. CCI, CZ, W This course interrogates the ways scholars in the social sciences and humanities have 
conceptualized and theorized value, and the curious absence of race/racism from this discourse. Drawing from 
scholarship in the fields of history, anthropology, African diaspora studies, and (ethno)musicology, students 
will develop a better understanding of the interrelationship between race and value and the distinct ways that 
race has been one of the most pervasive “value regimes” in the making of the modern world. Topics include 
the transatlantic slave trade and plantation societies in the Americas; intersections of race with science and 
technology; and black radical politics and expressive culture. Instructor: Harris. One course. C-L: African & 
African American Studies 419S, Cultural Anthropology 418S
423S. City Stories, Eastern Europe: Prague, Warsaw, Budapest, Sarajevo. CCI, CZ, SS One course. 
C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 423S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 423S
424-1. Medical Anthropology. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 424-1; also 
C-L: Global Health 321-1
428S. Gender, Sex and Citizenship. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 432S; also 
C-L: Study of Sexualities 432S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 432S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 428S, Human Rights
432S. Cultures of New Media. ALP, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 434S; also C-L: 
Literature 412S, Visual and Media Studies 412S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 425S
452. Economic Growth. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 452
459S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. 
C-L: see Spanish 433S; also C-L: Art History 433S, Visual and Media Studies 433S, Latin American Studies
460S. Mayas, Aztecs, and Incas: The World According to the Indigenous People of Latin 
America. CZ, EI, FL, R One course. C-L: see Spanish 412S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 367S, Latino/a 
Studies in the Global South 412S
465S. Global Cities. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 465S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 465S
479S. Screening Europe. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see French 489S; also C-L: Literature 489S, Visual 
and Media Studies 489S
489S. Capstone: Global Studies Seminar. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Interdisciplinary seminar for senior 



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 501

ICS majors; uses scholarship, literature and film to revisit critical global and transnational studies concepts 
and themes from ICS 195 at a level appropriate for seniors; writing-intensive, with assignments to facilitate 
analytical thinking; individual reflection on classroom, study away, and work experiences; library research; and 
engagement with the university intellectual and creative environment. Prerequisite: International Comparative 
Studies 195/History 103/Political Science 178/Religion 195/Sociology 195. Open to senior International 
Comparative Studies majors only. Instructor: Harris, Mathers, Namakkal, or Rosenblatt. One course.
490. Advanced Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from semester to semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Advanced Seminar in Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from semester 
to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Senior Honors Seminar. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W First semester of a two course sequence. Open to 
seniors pursuing Distinction in International Comparative Studies. Course supports beginning stages (project 
design, research, draft composition) of an interdisciplinary research-based project on a question of interest 
relevant to critical transnationalism. Course fulfills senior capstone requirement for ICS. Consent of instructor 
based on application and project proposal. Instructor: Harris, Mathers, Namakkal, or Rosenblatt. One course.
496S. Senior Honors Seminar. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W Continuation of International Comparative Studies 
495S. Open to seniors majoring in International Comparative Studies. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Mathers, Namakkal, or Rosenblatt. One course.
503S. Cartographies of Gender and Sexuality in Middle East. R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 503S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 527S
504S. Moments in Black (Radical) Theory: From Ferguson to Rhodes Must Fall to Silent Sam. 
CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 503S; also C-L: Religion 503S, Cultural 
Anthropology 503S, Political Science 589S
505S. Race in Comparative Perspective. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 505S
506. Politics of United States Foreign Policy. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 506; also C-L: 
Political Science 547
509S. Contemporary Dance History. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Dance 665S; also C-L: 
History 554S
510S. Global Africa. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 561S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 510S, History 561S, Political Science 527S
511S. Political Participation: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
509S
512S. Current Issues in International and Development Economics. SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Economics 568S
513. Documentary and East Asian Cultures. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 511; also C-L: Documentary Studies 511
514S. Assisting Development. R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 515S; also C-L: Political Science 
546S
515S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 515S; also C-L: Literature 515S, Visual and Media Studies 515S, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 505S
521S. International Environmental Regimes. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Political Science 545S; 
also C-L: Public Policy 581S
525S. Culture, Power, History. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 525S
527S. Music in Literature and Philosophy. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see German 580S; also C-L: 
English 580S
529S. Race and Ethnicity. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 529S; also C-L: African & African 



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)502

American Studies 551S
531S. Camera Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Art History 535S; also C-L: History 530S
537S. Post War Europe, 1945-1968: Politics, Society, and Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see History 537S; also C-L: Political Science 515S
539S. Atlantic Constellations: Migration, Exile, Second Slavery. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: 
see Spanish 539S; also C-L: History 542S
541S. Jews and the End of Theory. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 541S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 541S, Literature 580S
543S. Piracy and European Imperial Expansion in the Atlantic Basin, 1492-1730. CCI, CZ, R, 
SS One course. C-L: see History 543S
561. 9/11: Causes, Response & Strategy. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 561; also C-L: 
Political Science 544
577. Environmental Politics. SS One course. C-L: see Environment 577; also C-L: Public Policy 577
580S. Water Cooperation and Conflict. R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 580S; also C-L: 
Global Health 533S, Environment 543S
590. Special Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary from semester to semester, 
focusing either on specific world regions or particular comparative/global issues. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Topics in International Comparative Studies. Topics vary, focusing on either specific global 
regions or particular comparative/transnational issues. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
598. Economic Growth and Development Policy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 598
605. East Asian Cultural Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
605; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 605, Literature 571
613S. Third Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 613S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 530S, Latin American Studies 613S, Visual and Media Studies 611S
615S. The #Selfie. CZ, EI, R, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 615S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
615S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 615S
646S. Strategic Storytelling: Narratives for Development. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Public Policy 646S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 646S, Human Rights
647. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 646; also C-L: Sociology 647
664S. Leaders, Nations, and War. CCI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Political Science 664S

The Major
The ICS major is divided into four categories: (1) Core courses are taught by ICS faculty members and 

include the required gateway course (taken in first or second year), the required capstone seminar (taken in 
senior year), and for students in excellent academic standing who wish to complete a lengthy supervised research 
project, the two-semester senior year honors thesis sequence. (2) Region courses focus on a particular geographic 
area of the world. (3) Global courses focus on global and transnational studies. (4) Foreign language courses 
build expertise in one language related to a student’s region focus. Region, Global, and foreign language courses 
are offered by faculty members in many of Duke’s academic programs and departments, as well as in study away 
programs. Each ICS major must complete a curricular plan, updated with and approved by an ICS advisor each 
semester, to assure they are on track toward fulfilling major requirements. 

Major Requirements: Ten courses (Core, Region, and Global) at least eight of which must be at or above 
the 200 level and at least two of which must be at or above the 400 level. An additional four foreign language 
corequisite courses in one language, initiated at any level. Region and Global courses may not be below the 100 
level. The ICS gateway course fulfills one of the 100-level requirements and the ICS capstone seminar fulfills 
one of the 400-level or above requirements. Successful completion of the first semester of the ICS honors thesis 



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 503

sequence fulfills the capstone requirement. The second semester of the thesis sequence does not exempt majors 
from the second 400-level or above course requirement. The fourteen courses for the major are to be distributed 
as follows:

• Gateway Course: Comparative Approaches to Global Issues (ICS 195). This course is offered in fall 
and spring semesters. Whether or not they major in ICS, students are expected to complete the course 
in the first or second year of study. Students who plan to be ICS majors are expected to complete the 
course before a study-away semester. Rising juniors or juniors who decide to major in ICS may petition 
the director of undergraduate studies to take the course in exceptional circumstances, although course 
enrollment is capped at forty-nine and wait lists are honored. The course is cross-listed in DukeHub 
by the departments of cultural anthropology, sociology, history, religion, political science, and gender, 
sexuality, and feminist studies (the course number under which a student enrolls is irrelevant). ICS 195 
is a prerequisite for ICS 489S, the ICS capstone seminar.

• Region Concentration (four courses): To gain some historical, political, and cultural knowledge 
depth related to one part of the world, ICS majors choose a Region concentration and complete four 
courses chosen from ICS-approved region courses. The most up-to-date region courses are available on 
the ICS website. Region courses are generally not assigned an ICS number in DukeHub, although they 
will have such a number if they also meet ICS Global criteria.
• Criteria for ICS Region courses: Content is focused on cultural, social, historical, political, 

economic, and/or identity dynamics; is theoretically informed and empirically engaged with 
fieldwork, archives, literary, artistic, and cultural artifacts or processes, and/or statistical data; is 
largely focused on a particular place or region; and examines dynamics that occurred at any time 
from 1700 to the present, although it may include content that began in earlier periods.

• ICS Regions: ICS students choose a Region concentration from the following seven geographic 
options: Africa; China and East Asia; Europe; Latin America and the Caribbean; Middle East; 
Russia and Central Asia; and South Asia. Alternatively, an ICS major may propose to the director 
of undergraduate studies a differently conceptualized geographic Region focused on a part of the 
world not captured in or crossing these Region designations, for example, around a body of water 
or proximal borders. Cases made for such independently conceived areas must be thoughtful and 
intentional rather than ad hoc. The seven ICS Regions are based on historical, cultural, political, 
and/or economic histories of connection. At the same time, the ICS intellectual project understands 
that state borders and regions are dynamically produced by different processes and agendas, 
including transnational ones, and recognizes dramatic variety within these regions.

• Interdisciplinarity: The four Region courses chosen must come from at least two disciplinary 
or interdisciplinary departmental homes. The disciplinary home is determined by the originating 
departmental sponsor of the course. Approved ICS Region courses are listed according to the 
disciplinary home/number on the ICS website. However, a given ICS student may enroll in an 
approved Region course under any cross-list department/number.

• Study Away Courses in a Foreign Language: Content courses offered in an advanced level of a 
non-English language at a study-away institution may count toward a major’s Region concentration 
if they meet region criteria.

• Global Courses (4): ICS majors complete four courses chosen from a robust list of ICS-approved 
Global courses that is available on the ICS website. Global courses are typically assigned an ICS number 
in DukeHub, but are listed and organized according to the original disciplinary or interdisciplinary 
department home/number on the ICS website.
• Criteria for Global courses: Content is organized by a connective, transnational, comparative, 

or international approach to cultural, social, historical, political, economic, environmental, or 
discursive dynamics. Courses approach the above through one or more of the following nodes: 1) 
institutions, organizations, or systems; 2) identities and lived experiences; 3) circulations, circuits, 
borders, and migrations; 4) social or other movements; 5) cultural productions and receptions. By 
definition, course content should not be delimited by a focus on one place or state. Course content 
is theoretically informed and empirically engaged (ethnography, observation, interviews, archives, 
surveys, and statistical data; institutional, literary, artistic, cultural, commercial, or environmental 
artifacts, processes, or forms). Course content examines dynamics that occurred at any time from 
1700 to the present, although it may include content that began in earlier periods.



 International Comparative Studies (ICS)504

• Interdisciplinarity: The four Global courses chosen must come from at least two disciplinary 
or interdisciplinary departmental homes. The disciplinary home is determined by the originating 
departmental sponsor of the course. Approved ICS Global courses are listed according to the 
originating disciplinary home/number on the ICS website. However, a given ICS student may enroll 
under any cross-list department/number of an approved Global course.

• Foreign Language Corequisite (4 courses): Because language knowledge is crucial to deeper 
historical, political and cultural understanding, as well as social and professional functioning in a 
variety of settings, the ICS major requires two years (four full courses) of university courses in one 
non-English language used by a group in part or all of the geographic region concentration. College 
Board, IB, or other preuniversity language courses, knowledge, or exams cannot be counted toward 
this corequisite. Language courses used to fulfill the corequisite may begin at any level. Barring other 
restrictions, students should count toward the ICS major the most advanced university language 
courses taken. Barring other restrictions, unlimited content courses offered in one foreign language 
may count toward the foreign language corequisite. Language courses can be found in their sponsoring 
departments and will not be listed by ICS numbers in DukeHub. 
• Double Counting: One advanced language course may double count in the appropriate Region or 

Global category if its content meets ICS Region or Global criteria and other thresholds (see FAQs 
on the ICS website), whether the course is offered on Duke’s campus or is an approved study away 
course. 

• Research Methods: In certain situations, such as when a student is fluent in a non-English 
language widely used in the chosen Region concentration, one of the foreign language courses may 
be met with a research methods or research analysis course.

• Notes: Although the foreign language corequisite is not flexible, in certain cases there is reasonable 
flexibility in regard to the language used to fulfill it. Examples of such cases: 1) when a second 
year of a language is not taught at Duke; 2) when no language course is available at a sufficiently 
advanced level. See “Major Requirements” on the ICS website for additional notes on the ICS 
foreign language corequisite.

• Capstone Seminar: International Comparative Studies 489S (Capstone Seminar in International 
Comparative Studies). At least one section of this seminar is offered each fall and spring semester. The 
seminar is restricted to declared ICS majors in their final year or semester (for December graduates) 
of study. International Comparative Studies 195 is a prerequisite for International Comparative 
Studies 489S. ICS seniors who produce capstone seminar research projects of exceptional quality are 
nominated for the ICS Capstone Research Prize by their faculty member. Winners receive a book prize, 
are listed in the Duke Commencement Program, and are recognized in the ICS Diploma Program and 
Ceremony.

ICS Advising & ICS Curricular Plan: After a student has formally declared an ICS major, the director of 
undergraduate studies will assign the student an ICS faculty advisor. Each major is required to complete an ICS 
Curricular Plan (forms are available on the ICS website). In order to assure that each student’s curricular plan 
is accurate and up-to-date and each ICS major is on track for timely completion of the major, each ICS major 
is responsible for meeting with their ICS faculty advisor every semester before registration. Students who are 
studying away often communicate with their ICS advisor through email or Skype. This requirement to update 
a curricular plan every term also holds true for ICS AB2 majors and ICS majors who plan to study away the 
following semester, unless they have completed all ICS requirements and such completion is reflected on an 
updated, accurate, and approved curricular plan that is on file with the program. Because of the interdisciplinary 
nature of the ICS major, having an accurate and up-to-date curricular plan on file is the single most important 
administrative aspect for a successful senior clearance before commencement. 

Study Away: ICS students are strongly encouraged to study away for a semester, and a large majority of 
ICS majors complete some part of their coursework in study away programs. Students considering or planning to 
major in ICS are expected to complete the required gateway course, ICS 195, before a study away semester. Up to 
four full credit study away or transfer courses that meet ICS Region, Global, or foreign language criteria may count 
toward the major. Students who declare an ICS major are required to complete an ICS Curricular Plan with an 
advisor before leaving for a study away program. The ICS gateway, capstone, and thesis courses must be taken at 
Duke and may not be substituted with transfer or study away courses. No matter the number it is assigned by the 
university registrar, ICS considers any study away course determined to meet Region or Global criteria to be at the 
intermediate level, or between 200 and 399, for the purposes of fulfilling the requirements of the major. Further 



International Comparative Studies (ICS) 505

important information on study away requirements and policies is available on the ICS website.
Grants and Awards: Duke students who are not graduating seniors are eligible to apply for research 

funding provided by several units on campus. For more information, visit the Undergraduate Research Support 
Office website at https://undergraduateresearch.duke.edu/. In addition, rising seniors accepted into the ICS 
Distinction Program may apply for a summer travel grant to advance language learning and/or to conduct field 
research, funded by the Scott Lee Stephenson Memorial Fund. The author of an exceptional distinction project is 
recognized with the ICS Distinguished Thesis Award. Additionally, up to four Capstone Research (Book) Prizes 
are awarded to seniors who produce superb research in an ICS capstone seminar. 

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
ICS offers a Graduation with Distinction program for majors whose achievements in university coursework 

and co-curricular experiences have prepared them to complete an interdisciplinary research-based project on a 
question of interest relevant to the global and transnationalism focus of the ICS Program. 

Structure: A two-semester seminar sequence (International Comparative Studies 495S and International 
Comparative Studies 496S), taken fall and spring of senior year, supports the completion of the distinction project. 
Each student chooses a Duke faculty member qualified and willing to mentor the student on the project topic to 
serve as a research supervisor, and is guided through a multi-stage writing process by the ICS faculty member 
teaching the seminar sequence. Under most circumstances, the product is a completed thesis of seventy to one 
hundred pages on a topic relevant to ICS’s focus in global and transnational studies. Students may work in, with, 
and through different mediums, but all are required to complete a research-based and interdisciplinary piece of 
writing and to submit the final project in electronic form. The completed project is submitted for evaluation to the 
ICS Distinction Committee by mid-April of the senior year.

Coursework: Successful completion of International Comparative Studies 495S in fall term fulfills the 
major requirement for International Comparative Studies 489S, the senior capstone course. Students must 
complete eleven non-Foreign Language courses to graduate with distinction in the major instead of the standard 
ten. 

Application: To apply for admission to the honors seminar sequence a student must complete, by the 
end of the junior year, a substantial portion of the major (roughly eleven courses, including foreign language), 
must have strong academic achievement (at least 3.3 GPA) in all the courses completed for the major, and must 
have an updated and approved ICS curricular plan on file with the program. Applications from interested juniors 
are due the week after spring break. The application includes a project proposal (about five pages) and initial 
bibliography (one to two pages), along with a letter of recommendation from a Duke faculty member qualified 
and willing to serve as the research supervisor. Ideally, this faculty member should be someone who has worked 
with the student in a classroom setting. It is particularly important to have taken at least one university course 
that provides foundational knowledge on the topic of the proposed research project and to have taken at least 
one university course that required completion of a research paper (on any topic). The ICS Distinction Program 
Coordinator, Professor Mathers, can provide assistance on conceptualizing an ICS honors project. Further details 
on the application process, including specific deadlines, are available on the ICS website.

Levels of Distinction and Evaluation Procedure: Three levels are possible: Distinction, High 
Distinction, or Highest Distinction. Levels of distinction, based on the quality of the completed work and 
participation in the Honors sequence, are determined by the ICS Distinction Committee in consultation with the 
student’s research supervisor. Students who have done satisfactory work in the honors seminars but whose thesis 
is denied distinction will receive graded credit for the coursework. 

Double Honors: The ICS Program does not typically allow students to pursue double honors (i.e., complete 
a single interdisciplinary thesis for two different departments), but individual and rare exceptions may be granted. 

Further details on deadlines, schedules, and expectations for Graduation with Distinction in ICS are 
available on the ICS website.

Islamic Studies
Professor Omid Safi, Director

Undergraduate courses in Islamic studies are coordinated by the Duke Islamic Studies Center (DISC). 
These courses are designed to educate students about Islam and Muslim cultures, beliefs, and practices so they are 

https://undergraduateresearch.duke.edu


 Islamic Studies506

prepared upon graduation to engage Muslim communities knowledgeably and productively in their professional 
careers or prepared to pursue graduate study. 

The Duke Islamic Studies Center also sponsors lectures and conferences that bring prominent American 
and international Islamic studies scholars, artists, writers, and performers to Duke; coordinates a Middle East and 
Islam Focus cluster with the Duke Middle East Studies Center; and promotes cross-cultural exchange regarding 
Islam and Muslim communities.

Courses in Islamic Studies
African & African American Studies
271. Humanitarianism in Africa
274S. Islam in the Americas
575. Justice, Law, and Commerce in Islam
Arabic
501S. Translation as a Research Tool in Arabic and Islamic Studies
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
122. Islamic Civilization I
125. Egypt: Mother of the World
127. The Modern Middle East
143. Contemporary Israeli Cinema
160. Islam
179FS. Turkey: Muslim and Modern
185. Islamic Civilization II
186. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union
215S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film
216. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam
220S. From Al-Qaeda to ISIS: Understanding Terrorism, its Roots, Responses, and Ramifications
221. Arab Society and Culture in Film
230S. Islam in the Americas
244. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
283S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents
296S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk
322. Mystical Literature
324S. Muslim Philosophy and Theology, an introduction
325. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform
330S. Middle East Women Writers
373S. Islamic Mysticism
625. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform
683S. The City of Two Continents: Istanbul in Literature and Film
687. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union
Cultural Anthropology
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
256. Islamic Civilization I
257. Islamic Civilization II
283S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents
417S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film
423. Sex and Money
Economics
306. Economic History and Modernization of the Islamic Middle East
326. Islam and the State: Political Economy of Governance in the Middle East
Environment
147. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
216S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
214. Contemporary Israeli Cinema
German
511S. Theory and Practice of Literary Translation
History
158S. Gateway Seminar: Islam and Nationalism
207. Humanitarianism in Africa
209S. Islam in Asia
210. Islamic Civilization I
211. Islamic Civilization II
212. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union
214. The Modern Middle East
216S. Between Moscow, Beijing and Delhi: Narratives of Europe and Asia
239FS. Turkey: Muslim and Modern
283S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk
294. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam



Islamic Studies 507

351S. Islam in the Americas
380S. Islamic Mysticism
397S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents
444. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
207. Humanitarianism in Africa
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
374S. Islam in the Americas
International Comparative Studies
160. Islam
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
249S. Istanbul: City of Two Continents
345S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk
370S. Islam in Asia
380S. Islamic Mysticism
417S. The Middle East: From Facebook to Film
Jewish Studies
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
241. Contemporary Israeli Cinema
256. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam
258. The Modern Middle East
Literature
217. Contemporary Israeli Cinema
276S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk
640S. Theory and Practice of Literary Translation
Medieval and Renaissance Studies
268. Islamic Civilization I
269. Islamic Civilization II
357. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam
659. Justice, Law, and Commerce in Islam
Political Science
159. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
308. Islam and the State: Political Economy of Governance in the Middle East
322. Introduction to Middle East Politics
351. Economic History and Modernization of the Islamic Middle East
354. Politics in the Developing World
358. Globalization and Public Policy
367S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
Public Policy
178. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives
212. Globalization and Public Policy
279S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
354. Politics in the Developing World
Religion
160. Islam
212. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam
228. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union
263. Mystical Literature
274FS. Religion & Politics: The Middle East Today
370S. Understanding the Qur’an
372. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform
373S. Islamic Mysticism
374S. Muslim Philosophy and Theology, an introduction
375. Islamic Civilization I
376. Islamic Civilization II
378S. Islam in Asia
384S. Islam in the Americas
388S. Muslim Ethics and Islamic Law: Issues and Debates
660. Justice, Law, and Commerce in Islam
663. Islam and Modernism
664. The Religion and History of Islam
Russian
370S. Islam in Asia
Slavic and Eurasian Studies
279FS. Turkey: Muslim and Modern
287. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union
370S. Islam in Asia
373S. Between Moscow, Beijing and Delhi: Narratives of Europe and Asia
683S. The City of Two Continents: Istanbul in Literature and Film



 Jewish Studies (JEWISHST)508

687. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union
Sociology
345. Nations, Regions, and the Global Economy
Study of Ethics
221. Arab Society and Culture in Film
235S. Muslim Philosophy and Theology, an introduction
373S. Islamic Mysticism
Visual and Media Studies
248. Contemporary Israeli Cinema
417S. The Middle East: From Facebook to FilmItalian 

Italian
For courses in Italian, see Romance Studies on page 727. 

Japanese
For courses in Japanese, see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 203. 

Jewish Studies
Professor Lieber (Religious Studies), Director and Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Emeriti C. 
Meyers (Religious Studies), E. Meyers (Religious Studies), and Silverblatt (Cultural Anthropology); Professors 
Brettler (Religious Studies), Dainotto (Romance Studies), Davis (Divinity School), Hacohen (History), Holmgren 
(Slavic and Eurasian Studies), Lieber (Religious Studies), Solterer (Romance Studies), and Vengosh (Earth and 
Ocean Sciences); Associate Professors Gellen (German Studies), Ginsburg (Asian & Middle Eastern Studies); and 
Stein (Cultural Anthropology); Assistant Professor Ziolkowski (Romance Studies); Visiting Assistant Professor Y. 
Miller (History); Instructor Bigman (Asian & Middle Eastern Studies)

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
This program is sponsored by the interdisciplinary Duke Center for Jewish Studies. Participating 

departments and programs include Asian & Middle Eastern Studies, Classical Studies, International Comparative 
Studies, Cultural Anthropology, English, Germanic Languages, History, Medieval and Renaissance Studies, 
Political Science, Religious Studies, and Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies. A full range of courses is 
available in classical and modern Hebrew. Also, relevant courses in Jewish studies may be taken at The University 
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.

The certificate program offers students the flexibility to design, with the aid of a faculty advisor, a curriculum 
that meets individual interests and talents. 

Certificate Requirement
Six courses are required for the certificate, and an independent study to be arranged in consultation with 

the director of undergraduate studies. Four courses must be at or above the 200 level. Not more than three courses 
in religious studies may count for the certificate. Three (semesters) of Hebrew language courses may count toward 
the certificate.

Courses in Jewish Studies (JEWISHST)
80S. Special Topics in Writing. Various topics with diverse readings and intensive writing. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
89S. First Year Seminar. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Elementary Modern Hebrew. FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 101
102. Elementary Modern Hebrew. FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 102
140. Judaism. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 140; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
141. Judaism Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Religion 141
145. The Old Testament/Hebrew Bible. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 145; also C-L: Ethics 



Jewish Studies (JEWISHST) 509

Elective
148. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 148; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 244, Environment 147, Public Policy 178, Political 
Science 159, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 148, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies, 
Human Rights
156. Scripture: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 156; 
also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 138
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Jewish Studies. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics: Jewish Studies Focus Seminar. Topics vary by semester when offered. Open only 
to students in Focus Program. One course.
203. Intermediate Modern Hebrew. ALP, FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 203
204. Intermediate Modern Hebrew. ALP, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 204
206S. The Israeli-Palestinian Conflict in Films. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 201S
215S. Hinduism and Judaism: Culture, Religion, and Identity. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Religion 
216S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 349S
241. Contemporary Israeli Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
143; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 248, Literature 217, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 214, 
Islamic Studies
243. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Italian 220; also C-L: 
German 243, Literature 244, English 244, International Comparative Studies 212
245. Introduction to Israeli Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
144
251. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 251; also C-L: 
Religion 340, International Comparative Studies 253, Ethics Elective
256. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam. CCI, CZ, EI This course will explore the relationship 
between Judaism and Islam from Muhammad’s initial encounter with the Jews of Medina until the 13th 
century, a period in which the majority of Jews in the world lived under Islamic rule. Striking a balance between 
the examination of the relationship between these two rich religious traditions and the investigation into the 
historical experiences of Jews, this course will examine the shared cultural heritage of the two religions, the 
legal position of Jews in Islam and medieval works of polemics. Through the documents of the Cairo Geniza, we 
will explore the everyday realities of Jews thoroughly embedded in the surrounding Islamic and Arab culture. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 357, Religion 212, Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 216, History 294, Islamic Studies
258. The Modern Middle East. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 214; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 127, International Comparative Studies, Islamic Studies
266S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 341S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 275S, Literature 263S, 
Documentary Studies
269S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see Polish 308S; also C-L: Religion 269S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 308S, Human Rights
271. Sex and Gender in the Hebrew Bible. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 271; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
290S. Special Topics in Jewish Studies. Topics vary by semester. Consent of instructor is required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Jewish Studies (JEWISHST)510

301D. Religion, Restrictions, and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 301D; also C-L: 
Political Science 303D, Public Policy 313D, Study of Ethics 303D, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 301D
305S. Advanced Modern Hebrew. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 305S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
306S. Advanced Modern Hebrew. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 306S
315SA. New York Scenes. ALP, R One course. C-L: see English 315SA; also C-L: Theater Studies 218SA, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 315SA, Art History 318SA, African & African American Studies 318SA
319S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 319S; also C-L: Religion 214S, Romance Studies 319S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 352S
337. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see Italian 337; 
also C-L: English 237, Literature 337
340S. Death and the Emergence of the Modern Self. ALP, CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 451S
342. The Holocaust. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 297; also C-L: Religion 342, Political 
Science 262, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 297, Human Rights
367A. Jewish Berlin. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 367A; also C-L: Literature 367A, 
International Comparative Studies
368. German Jewish Culture from the Enlightenment to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see German 368; also C-L: Literature 368, Religion 343
369. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 
387; also C-L: Literature 369, History 261, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 387, Human 
Rights
372. Kafka and Cinema. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see German 372; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 371, Literature 377
390. Special Topics in Jewish Studies. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Topics. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390S. Special Topics in Jewish Studies. Seminar version of Jewish Studies 390. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
407S. Issues in Modern Hebrew. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 407S
455S. Introduction to Israeli Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Hebrew 455S
490S. Special Topics in Jewish Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
497S. Research Scholars Colloquium. Colloquium for Jewish Studies Undergraduate Research Scholars. 
DUS approval required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
519S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 519S; also C-L: Religion 519S, Romance Studies 519S
541S. Jews and the End of Theory. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 541S; also C-L: Literature 580S, International Comparative Studies 541S
550. Archaeology of Palestine in Hellenistic-Roman Times. CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Religion 550
555S. Art and the Holocaust: Architecture, Art, and Cultural Politics during the Nazi Period. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 525S; also C-L: German 565S, History 531S
601S. Introduction to Jewish Studies. An introduction to the topics and methods that are characteristic 
of Jewish studies as an academic and scholarly rubric in the contemporary university. The course engages both 
the history of Judaism as a religious culture and the history of Jewish Studies. Co-taught with faculty from UNC. 



Jewish Studies (JEWISHST) 511

Weekly meetings will alternate between Duke and UNC campuses. Instructor: Lieber. One course. C-L: Religion 
613S, History 601S
606S. Hebrew Biblical Texts. One course. C-L: see Religion 606S
607. Hebrew Prose Narrative. FL One course. C-L: see Religion 607
608. Classical Hebrew Poetry. FL One course. C-L: see Religion 608
609. Rabbinic Hebrew. FL One course. C-L: see Religion 609
610. Readings in Hebrew Biblical Commentaries. One course. C-L: see Religion 610
683. The Palestinian-Israeli Conflict in Literature and Film. One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 603; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 603, Human Rights

Opportunities for independent study are also offered in various related departments. Procedures for 
registration and applications are available in 230 Gray Building.

For further information, contact the director of the Center for Jewish Studies, Box 90964, Durham, NC 
277080964.

Korean
For courses in Korean, see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 203. 

Latin
For courses in Latin, see Classical Studies on page 247.

Latin American & Caribbean Studies
Patrick Duddy, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The Program in Latin American & Caribbean Studies, which is administered by the Center for Latin American 

and Caribbean Studies (CLACS), provides students with the opportunity for interdisciplinary, in-depth study of 
the realities of Latin American and Caribbean societies and cultures. In addition to offering a certificate and a 
wide array of area studies and language courses, CLACS also sponsors lectures, Mellon Visiting Professors, and 
an annual competition for Mellon Undergraduate Summer Research Awards in Latin America or the Caribbean. 
Moreover, the center and the Institute for the Study of the Americas at The University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill sponsor the Consortium in Latin American Studies at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and 
Duke University, which provides opportunities for collaboration with faculty and students from both campuses 
who are interested in the region. The consortium sponsors yearly working groups and an annual Latin American 
Film Festival.

Students interested in earning a certificate in Latin American & Caribbean Studies are encouraged to declare 
it by completion of their fifth semester. Students may also elect this interest in Latin America while participating 
in a Duke-approved study abroad program either during a summer or during their junior year. 

For further information consult the academic program coordinator of the Center for Latin American and 
Caribbean Studies located in the John Hope Franklin Center, 2204 Erwin Road, Durham, NC 27708. 

Certificate in Latin American and Caribbean Studies
The course of study for program participants is intended to be interdisciplinary. Students working toward 

a certificate in Latin American and Caribbean studies will declare a major in an academic department. To qualify 
for the certificate, students take Latin American Studies 230 (Introduction to Contemporary Latin America), the 
interdisciplinary capstone seminar (Latin American Studies 498S or other courses designated as a capstone each 
term), fulfill the indicated language requirement, and take three additional area courses, two of which must be at 
or above the 200 level. Also, at least three different departments must be represented overall, with no more than 
three courses counting from one single department or major. The language requirement can be fulfilled in one 



 Latin American Studies (LATAMER)512

of three ways: (1) by taking three language courses below the 300 level in any one of the most commonly taught 
languages spoken in Latin America: Spanish, Portuguese, French; (2) by taking one course taught in any one of 
these languages at the 300 level or above; or (3) by taking two courses in any one of the less commonly taught 
Latin American languages (such as Haitian Creole, K’iche’ Maya, or Yucatec Maya). A Summer Intensive Yucatec 
Maya Language Program is also offered through the Consortium in Latin American Studies, and Haitian Creole 
and K’iche’ Maya are now offered at Duke.

Appropriate courses may come from the list given below, or may include other courses not listed below 
(new courses, special topics courses, and independent study) with at least 50 percent of course content on a 
Latin American topic and with term papers or other major projects focusing on a Latin American subject. To 
determine if specific courses meet requirements for the certificate, students should consult the academic program 
coordinator. Regular courses are described under the listing of the various departments. Students may also wish 
to take advantage of house courses offered on Latin American topics although house courses cannot satisfy the 
requirements of the certificate. 

Eligible undergraduates satisfying the certificate may use no more than two courses that are also used to 
satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, or other certificate program. International comparative studies 
majors and minors interested in choosing Latin America as their primary area of concentration within that major 
or minor should consult the director of International Comparative Studies.

Courses in Latin American Studies (LATAMER)
89S. First Year Seminar in Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Topics vary by semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
121. Introduction to Contemporary Latin America. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 121; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 121
122. History of Latinxs in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 122; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 122, International Comparative Studies 122, Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South
222. Environment and Global Capitalism in Latin America. CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 
222; also C-L: Environment 223
223. Mexico Since Before Cortes. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 324
246S. Human Rights in the Americas. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 245S; also 
C-L: History 242S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 245S, International Comparative 
Studies, Human Rights
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas. EI, SS One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 283SL; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 285SL, African & African American Studies 
283SL, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 283SL, Human Rights
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Latin American Studies. Topics differ 
by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
320S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 
320S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 247S, International Comparative Studies 320S, Information 
Science + Studies 323S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
323S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 318S, Human Rights
321. Visualizing the Caribbean. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
321; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 368, International Comparative Studies 318
327. El cine político en américa Latina. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 339; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 383, Literature 339
328. Global Brazil. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 328; also C-L: African & African American 
Studies 213, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 328, Human Rights
330S. Middle East and Latin America. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
375S; also C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South
336S. Unraveling Paradise: Examining the Mythical Ideal Through Art and Documentary of the 



Latin American Studies (LATAMER) 513

Caribbean. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 336S; also C-L: Visual Arts 336S, Visual 
and Media Studies 367S
341S. Perspectives on the Amazon. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Portuguese 341S; also C-L: Literature 
341S
343. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking. ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 343; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 342, Sociology 343, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 339, Human Rights
349. Political Economy of Latin America. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 349; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 354
363S. The Idea of Latin America in the Global World Order. CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 
363S
380S. Political Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 380S; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 420S, Literature 381S
390. Special Topics in Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Interdisciplinary study of geographical, 
historical, economic, governmental, political, and cultural aspects of modern Latin America and the current 
issues facing the region. Specific topics will vary from year to year. For all undergraduates. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390S. Special Topics in Latin American and Caribbean Culture and Society. This course covers 
a broad range of cultural topics in Latin American and Caribbean studies from music, art, language, film, 
journalism, dance, poetry, etc. and explores the ways in which cultural expression reflects and criticizes social, 
economic and political forces in the region. Different topics will be chosen each term. Staff: Departmental. One 
course.
409. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 409; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 409, 
International Comparative Studies 409, Sociology 409
450S. The Global Caribbean. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
450S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 450S, International Comparative Studies 418S, Sociology 450S
471S. Capstone Seminar: Latin American Left Turns: A New Politics for the 21st Century?. CCI, 
CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 471S; also C-L: Political Science 497S
490A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Latin American 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Interdisciplinary study of 
geographical, historical, economic, governmental, political, and cultural aspects of modern Latin America and 
the current issues facing the region. Specific topics will vary from year to year. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Latino/as in the Global South Capstone - Global/Local Contexts. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Latino/a Studies in the Global South 495S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 495S, Romance Studies 495S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 495S
498S. Capstone Seminar in Latin American Studies. CCI, SS Required for students seeking the 
certificate in Latin American Studies. Synthesis, interpretation, and application of knowledge gained in previous 
courses and experiences abroad (DukeEngage, study abroad, internships, etc.). Explores in greater detail 
interdisciplinary topics related to Latin American and Caribbean Studies, with significant emphasis on student 
mentoring and capstone thesis/project. Frequently taught by visiting scholars from Latin America. Open to 
juniors and seniors only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
540S. Memory and Documentary Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Romance 
Studies 540S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 540S, Documentary Studies 540S, Literature 544S
590. Special Topics in Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Interdisciplinary study of geographical, 
historical, economic, governmental, political, and cultural aspects of modern Latin America and the current 
issues facing the region. Specific topics will vary from year to year. For juniors, seniors and graduate students. 
Instructor; Staff. One course.



 Latin American Studies (LATAMER)514

590S. Special Topics in Latin American and Caribbean Studies. Interdisciplinary study of 
geographical, historical, economic, governmental, political, and cultural aspects of modern Latin America and 
the current issues facing the region. Specific topics will vary from year to year. For juniors, seniors and graduate 
students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
594S. Cultural (Con)Fusions of Asians and Africans. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 594S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 594S, Sociology 594S
613S. Third Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 613S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 530S, International Comparative Studies 613S, Visual and Media Studies 611S, 
International Comparative Studies
690-1. Topics in Latin American Cultural Studies. A problem-oriented course, but also covering 
theoretical issues, integrating approaches from two or more disciplines. Topics vary from year to year. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S. Special Topics in Latin American and Caribbean Culture and Society. This course covers, 
at a graduate level, a broad range of cultural topics in Latin American and Caribbean studies from music, art, 
language, film, journalism, dance, poetry, politics etc. and explores the ways in which cultural expression reflects 
and criticizes social, economic and political forces in the region. Different topics will be chosen each term. One 
course.

Latin American Area Courses
African & African American Studies
209. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
217S. The Atlantic Slave Trade
218. The Caribbean, 1492-1700
219. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
264. Latin American Wars of Independence
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
Art History
433S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
202S. Francophone Literature
Biology
561. Tropical Ecology
Cultural Anthropology
285SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
348A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization
Environment
223. Environment and Global Capitalism in Latin America
517. Tropical Ecology
French
417S. Francophone Literature
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
History
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
222. Environment and Global Capitalism in Latin America
264. Latin American Wars of Independence
316S. The Atlantic Slave Trade
318. The Caribbean, 1492-1700
319. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
324. Mexico Since Before Cortes
326. Colonial Latin America
327. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
329. Latin America Since Independence
387S. Francophone Literature
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
219. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
327. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
432S. Popular Culture and Political Repression in Spain and Latin America
International Comparative Studies
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
209S. The Atlantic Slave Trade
232. Latin American Wars of Independence



Latin American Studies (LATAMER) 515

263. War, Slavery, and Revolution in the Caribbean, 1700-1800
283SL. Death, Burial, and Justice in the Americas
459S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest
Music
325A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization
Political Science
257. Latin American Wars of Independence
343S. The US Border and its Borderlands
Portuguese
260. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History
Public Policy
216S. The US Border and its Borderlands
Sociology
226. The Challenges of Development
Spanish
334. Introduction to Spanish-American Literature
335. Introduction to Spanish-American Literature
344A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization
432S. Popular Culture and Political Repression in Spain and Latin America
433S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest
Visual and Media Studies
433S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest
556S. Latin American Modernism and Visual Culture

Latino/a Studies in the Global South
Professor Claudia Milian, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The undergraduate certificate in Latino/a studies in the Global South is administered by the Program 

in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. This interdisciplinary certificate is designed to provide students with 
comparative, historical, and cultural knowledge of peoples of Latin American descent living in the United States 
(and moving transnationally); understanding of the concepts of Hispanics/Latino/as, latinidad and hispanidad, 
and the Global South (and Global North); and insight into the construction and assertion of Latino/a identities, 
involving convergences and divergences, over space and time. This certificate program allows students to draw 
on both the strength and scope of Duke’s offerings in Latino/a studies as well as complementary courses offered 
at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, which offers an interdisciplinary minor in Latina/o studies. 

In addition to offering courses and a certificate after completion of the requirements, the Program in 
Latino/a Studies in the global South offers a variety of supplemental educational opportunities, including lectures 
and events involving prominent scholars, artists, writers, musicians, and performers; financial assistance for 
student-organized academic discussions; conference awards; advising; and a resource room. Students are invited 
to use the Latino/a Studies Resource Room (Friedl Building 124) for study sessions and meetings with faculty, 
students, staff, and community members. Resources available in this room include encyclopedias, texts, novels, 
scholarly journals, videos, and music. Students may also take advantage of events, lectures, and an annual film 
festival hosted by the Center for Latin American and Caribbean Studies, which include Latino/a Studies content. 
Students may enroll in Spanish Service Learning courses as well as Duke-approved study away programs and 
DukeEngage programs that focus on Latino/a populations in the United States and/or that take place in various 
countries within Latin America. For further information, consult the Senior Program Coordinator of Latino/a 
Studies at 122 Friedl, East Campus.

Program Requirements
The course of study for program participants is interdisciplinary, with a minimum total of six courses. 

Students working toward a certificate in Latino/a studies in the Global South are encouraged (but not required) 
to declare it by their fourth semester. To enroll in the certificate program, students should officially declare their 
intention to pursue the certificate through academic advising (first- and second-year students) or through the 
Office of the University Registrar (juniors and seniors) and should also meet in person with the Senior Program 
Coordinator for Latino/a studies to complete required paperwork and discuss the academic plan.

In meeting the total requirements, a minimum of three departments must be represented, with no more 
than half (50 percent) of the courses originating in a single academic unit. Students may count toward this 



 Latino/a Studies in the Global South (LSGS)516

certificate no more than two courses that are being used to fulfill the requirements of any major, minor, or other 
certificate. To qualify for the certificate, students will take:

• Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201 or 201S (Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global 
South).

• four elective courses, three of which must be at or above the 200-level. Of the elective courses, at least 
one must be a humanities course, and one a social science course. Qualifying courses may come from 
the list provided below, or may include other courses not listed (new courses, special topics courses, 
and independent study), and must have at least 50 percent of course content on Latino/as or Latino/a 
studies and with term papers or other major projects focusing on this field. Language courses directly 
applicable to students’ work in the certificate (e.g., in American indigenous languages or languages 
relevant to the study of Latino/a migrations to other areas of the Global South) can also be considered. 
To determine if specific courses meet requirements for the certificate, students should consult the 
Senior Program Coordinator. Up to two of the elective courses may be taken at The University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill, in consultation with the Senior Program Coordinator. Courses taken abroad 
with Latino/a Studies content that appear on the Duke transcript may count toward the elective course 
total. Students may also wish to take advantage of house courses offered on Latino/a Studies topics, 
although house courses do not satisfy any requirement of the certificate program. 

• Latino/a Studies in the Global South 495S (Capstone in Latino/a Studies in the Global South), or 
equivalent advanced offering with Program approval, preferably in the senior year.

Courses in Latino/a Studies in the Global South (LSGS)
89S. First Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS Introduction to the 
interdisciplinary field of Latino/a Studies, and how it reconfigures the study of the United States and the 
Americas. Considers literature, history, sociology, economics, politics, culture and language in examining terms 
such as: Latino, latinidad, Global South, transnational, globalization, and multiculturalism. Exploration of 
alignments and divergences of Latino/a Studies with African and African American Studies, Latin American 
and Caribbean Studies, and Critical US Studies. Classroom learning will connect with the community outside of 
Duke. Required introductory course for students in the Latino/a Studies in the Global South certificate program. 
Instructor: Viego. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 104, International Comparative Studies 
106, Literature 243, Spanish 160
201S. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS Intro to the 
interdisciplinary field of Latino/a Studies, and how it reconfigures the study of the United States and the 
Americas. Considers literature, history, sociology, economics, politics, culture and language in examining terms 
such as: Latino, latinidad, Global South, transnational, globalization, and multiculturalism. Exploration of 
alignments and divergences of Latino/a Studies with African and African American Studies, Latin American 
and Caribbean Studies, and Critical US Studies. Classroom learning will connect with the community outside 
of Duke. Required intro course for students in the Latino/a Studies in the Global South certificate program. 
Instructor: Viego. One course. C-L: Literature 243S, Spanish 160S, African & African American Studies 104S, 
International Comparative Studies 106S
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands. CCI, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Cultural Anthropology 254; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 254, International 
Comparative Studies 254
290. Special Topics in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. Topics vary by semester, but always have 
at least 50% of course content on Latino/as or Latino/a Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. Topics vary by semester, but always have 
at least 50% of course content on Latino/as or Latino/a Studies. One course.
305. Advanced Spanish for Heritage Learners. CCI, CZ, FL, W One course. C-L: see Spanish 305
306. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 306; also C-L: 
Global Health 326, Cultural Anthropology 306, Human Rights
307S. Issues of Education and Immigration. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 307S; also C-L: 
Education 307S



Latino/a Studies in the Global South (LSGS) 517

308S. Latinx Voices in Duke, Durham, and Beyond. CCI, CZ, FL, W One course. C-L: see Spanish 
308S
310. Translating Spanish-English and English-Spanish. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 
310; also C-L: Linguistics 310
314S. US Latin@ Histories. CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 314S
316. Sociology of Racism in America. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Sociology 215; also C-L: African 
& African American Studies 246, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 215, Marxism and 
Society, Human Rights
330S. Undocumented America in Literature. ALP, CCI This seminar explores the representation of lived 
experiences, trajectories, and current events vis-à-vis the figure of the undocumented migrant, in contemporary 
American literature. Testimonial accounts, journalism chronicles, memoirs, poetry, cinematic works, and critical 
scholarship inform and propel our study of the experience of (“illegal”) migrant movement––departure, journey, 
and arrival––as portrayed in Latino and Latina literature. We will question status designations such as “illegal,” 
“undocumented,” and “unauthorized”; “legitimacy” and recognition; the inadmissible and the construction 
of “suspect” bodies; social participation in US society. Instructor: Milian. One course. C-L: Literature 329S, 
Romance Studies 330S, Cultural Anthropology 329S
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 332S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 236S, Visual and Media Studies 
341S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 332S, Human Rights
336. Introduction to US Latino/a Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Spanish 336; also C-L: 
Literature 336
350. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350; also C-L: Neuroscience 250, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 350, Romance Studies 350
350S. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350S; also C-L: Neuroscience 250S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 350S, Romance Studies 350S
365S. Latino/a Popular Culture. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Romance Studies 365S
390. Special Topics in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. A comparative and interdisciplinary 
approach to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. Topics and instructors vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390S. Special Topics in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. A comparative and interdisciplinary 
approach to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. Topics vary by semester and instructors. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
412S. Mayas, Aztecs, and Incas: The World According to the Indigenous People of Latin America. 
CZ, EI, FL, R One course. C-L: see Spanish 412S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 367S, International 
Comparative Studies 460S
465S. Capstone Seminar: History of the U.S./Mexico Border, 18th to 20th Centuries. CCI, CZ, R, 
SS, W One course. C-L: see History 465S
490S. Special Topics in US Latina/o Literatures and Cultural Studies. One course. C-L: see Spanish 
490S-2
490S-1. Special Topics in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. A comparative and interdisciplinary 
approach to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. Topics vary with instructors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Latino/as in the Global South Capstone - Global/Local Contexts. CCI, CZ, SS Required for 
students seeking the certificate in Latino/a Studies in the Global South. Provides students with the opportunity 
to synthesize theories and methodologies in Latino/a Studies taken in previous coursework and to critically 
reflect on content related to the Latino/a world, especially about latinidad in local and global contexts. Utilizes 
texts of a rigorous and probing nature in relation to individual research projects. Open to juniors and seniors 
who have previously taken Latino/a Studies in the Global South 101S: Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South. Instructor: Viego. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 495S, Latin American Studies 495S, 
Romance Studies 495S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 495S



 Latino/a Studies in the Global South (LSGS)518

690. Special Topics in Latino Studies in the Global South. A comparative approach to Latino Studies in 
the Global South that draws on the methods and materials of other disciplines. Focus on interdisciplinary study. 
Contents vary with instructors. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Electives
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
375S. Middle East and Latin America
Cultural Anthropology
236S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands
348A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization
Documentary Studies
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
History
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
389S. Family Rights/Human Rights
465S. Capstone Seminar: History of the U.S./Mexico Border, 18th to 20th Centuries
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands
332S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change
389S. Family Rights/Human Rights
International Comparative Studies
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
254. Cultures and Politics of the America Borderlands
Latin American Studies
122. History of Latinxs in the United States
330S. Middle East and Latin America
Music
325A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization
Public Policy
346S. Family Rights/Human Rights
Spanish
303. Introduction to Cultural Studies
344A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization
Visual and Media Studies
341S. Farmworkers in North Carolina: Roots of Poverty, Roots of Change

Linguistics
Professor Andrews, Chair and Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Andrews, Benmanoun (Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies), Brandon (Philosophy), Rosenberg (Philosophy), Rubin (Psychology), and Tomasello 
(Psychology); Associate Professors Baran (English) and Day (Psychology); Assistant Professor Bergelson (Psy-
chology); Professors of the Practice Fellin (Romance Studies) and Paredes (Romance Studies); Visiting Professor 
Newcity; Visiting Assistant Professor Price; Affiliated Faculty: Professors Flanagan (Philosophy), Neander (Phi-
losophy), and Rubin (Psychology); Assistant Professor Sterrett (Philosophy); Professor of the Practice Kim (Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies); Research Professor Mazuka (Psychology)

A major and a minor are available in this program.
From the earliest philosophers to modern neuroscientists, researchers from a wide range of disciplines have 

explored a diverse range of issues concerning the human capacity for language and the diversity of the world’s 
languages. Linguists work at the intersection of these issues and define linguistics as the science of language and 
languages. During the past 150 years, linguists have developed a variety of theoretical paradigms to describe and 
explain language history, dialect variation, cross-cultural similarities and differences, the neurological processing 
and production of language, and the evolutionary emergence of language.

The linguistics major at Duke is unusual in its range of theoretical approaches coupled to the study of 
languages of the world. The required courses for the major stress empirical methods and the global database; the 
theory courses expose the student to the perspectives offered by historical and comparative linguistics, structural 
linguistics, generative linguistics, sociolinguistics, semiotics, discourse analysis, philosophy, cognitive linguistics, 
and psycholinguistics. The major maintains the traditional and mainstream body of linguistic inquiry and, at the 
same time, encourages exploration of the most recent developments in language study that issue from cultural 



Linguistics (LINGUIST) 519

and literary theory and the biological sciences.

Courses in Linguistics (LINGUIST)
89S. First-Year Seminar Special Topics. First year seminar devoted to relevant topics in the field of 
linguistics, including sociolinguistics, neurolinguistics, cognitive linguistics, linguistic theory, languages of the 
world, language and identity, language and migration, language and media, language and culture, and language 
and law. Instructor: Staff. One course.
114FS. The Power of Poetry. ALP, CZ Takes different approaches to thinking through the relationship of 
poetry to power and the place and function of poetic language in contrast to other language forms. Specific units: 
1) poetry’s roots in what we think of as prayers, spells, and curses and the roots of theatre and epic narrative in 
rituals associated with these forms- focus primarily on early Vedic poetry and the work of Laurie Patton and 
Theodore Proferes on its public dimensions, 2) comparative/historical study 3) an exploration of “lyric” as a 
form of play, and 4) consideration of arguments for the value and function of poetry in contemporary culture. 
Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Need. One course.
115FS. Games and the Brain. NS An introduction to the brain, fMRI technology, and tools used to analyze 
fMRI data. Analyze neural substrates that support game play through hands-on work with functional magnetic 
resonance imaging data. Consider structured games and how they can be used to answer questions about the 
brain. Design an fMRI experiment to learn something new about the brain. Initial assignments will assess data 
quality and prepare it for later analyses using a general-linear-model framework. Open only to students in the 
FOCUS program. Instructor: Carter. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 157FS
123FS. When the Head’s in Trouble: Language, Lesions and Loss. NS Study of neurological 
breakdowns due to lesions from benign and malignant brain tumors, epilepsy (w/without lesions), head/
neck cancer. Includes fundamentals of neuroanatomy, neurophysiology and head/neck physiology. Explores 
important diagnostic and research procedures, including cortical stimulation mapping, innovations in radiation 
therapy, surgery, molecular targeting, imaging, minimizing side effects of treatment, clinical trials. Topics 
include neurocognitive variation across patients with focus on memory and language, cortical and network 
abnormalities in criminal psychopathy, oncology and the human papilloma virus, and radiation/surgical 
treatments for head and neck cancer. Instructors: Brizel and Serafini. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 123FS
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170; also C-L: Sociology 160, Visual and Media Studies 170, International Comparative Studies 
169, Policy Journalism and Media Studies, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
170D. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170D; also C-L: Sociology 160D, Visual and Media Studies 170D
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Linguistics. The study of linguistics 
and languages on Duke-approved programs at foreign institutions of higher learning. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics in Linguistics. Topics vary by semester. For students in the FOCUS program. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
195FS. Cognition, Identity, and Linguistic (Human) Rights. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Romance Studies 195FS
201. Introduction to Linguistics. CCI, SS Introduction to the scientific study of linguistics and 
languages. Topics include the origin and nature of language, methods of historical and comparative linguistics, 
theories and schools of linguistics, empirical and descriptive approaches to the study of language, including 
phonology, morphology, semantics, and syntax. Instructor: Price. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 201, 
International Comparative Studies
202. Languages of the World. CCI, SS The major languages of the world viewed in the context of the 
communicative and significate functions of language as parameters that shape and define society. The role of 
language in defining and structuring culturally-based relationships from a semiotic point of view. The structure, 
writing systems, phonology, morphology, and lexicon of languages from the following groups: Indo-European, 
Semitic, Turkic, Finno-Ugric, Caucasian, Afroasiatic, Sino-Tibetan, Niger-Kordofanian, Dravidian, and Native 
American languages. Instructor: Baran. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 202, Russian 362, International 



 Linguistics (LINGUIST)520

Comparative Studies 210
203. Elements of Linguistic Structure. SS Examination of the main aspects of the phonemic systems and 
sound patterns and alternations of various languages that belong to different linguistic families, their word 
formation processes and mechanisms, and their phrasal and sentential syntactic structures and representations. 
Topics include the main issues in the field and theoretical approaches to natural languages and to language 
variation and change. Instructor: Benmamoun. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 219
204. History of English. SS One course. C-L: see English 204
205. The Law and Language. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Intersections of language and law and legal institutions 
examined from a comparative approach, i.e., official state language and national identity; freedom of speech and 
its limitations; language as property. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 205
206. Variety in Language: English in the United States. CCI, SS English language variation in the 
United States considered from a current sociolinguistic perspective. Social, regional, ethnic, gender, and 
stylistic-related language variation, along with models for describing and applying knowledge about language 
variation. Language variation focused on vernacular varieties of American English in general and on North 
Carolina in particular. C-L. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 206
207. Psychology of Language. R, SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 256
208. Philosophy of Mind. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Philosophy 212; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
302, Information Science + Studies
209. Philosophy of Language. CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 209
210FS. The Mind and Language. SS One course. C-L: see English 209FS
210S. The Mind and Language. SS One course. C-L: see English 209S
212FS. Law, Ethics & Responsibility. EI, SS, STS Examines the intersection of law and neuroscience, 
including the use of neuroimaging to determine if a witness is telling the truth; the implications of neuroscience 
for determining the mental competency of defendants, the insanity defense, the imposition of punishment on 
defendants. Considers the extent to which recent advances in brain science cause us to reevaluate fundamental 
legal concepts of “intent,” “insanity,” and responsibility; the ways in which neuroscience may be applied to these 
and related issues; and the inherent limitations and incongruities of applying brain science to legal questions. 
Instructor: Newcity. One course. C-L: Public Policy 250FS, Science & Society 212FS
213FS. The Politics of Language. SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 215FS; also C-L: 
Political Science 185FS, International Comparative Studies 228FS
216FS. Neuroscience and Human Language. NS, SS Same as Linguist 216S; open only to students in 
the Focus Program. Prerequisite: Advanced placement credit in Biology. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: 
Neuroscience 116FS, Science & Society
216S. Neuroscience and Human Language. NS, SS The relationship of brain and language explored 
through a variety of methodologies and approaches, including first and second language acquisition across 
cultures, multilingualism, language disorders, and imaging studies of language acquisition, maintenance and 
loss. Special attention to Russian contributions to cognitive neuroscience and linguistic theory. Prerequisite: 
Advanced Placement credit in biology. One course. C-L: Russian 216S, Neuroscience 116S, Science & Society
217FS. Language, Thought, and Culture. CCI, CZ, SS Examines how language, thought, and culture 
are interrelated processes and structures. Takes a sociolinguistic perspective that language and society are 
intertwined, to understand how language either constrains or influences thought, how culture and language 
interact, and how culture is constructed through cognition. Course covers the study of signs (semiotics), cultural 
and linguistic depictions of people, groups, and issues (representation and discourse analysis), individual and 
societal beliefs about language itself (language ideologies), how meaning is created and perceived (semantics), 
and how speakers use language in real-life situations (linguistic anthropology). Open only to students in Focus 
Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Fellin and Price. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 217FS
218FS. Language and Identity. CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see Romance Studies 207FS
219S. North Indian Classical Music: Structure, Culture and Lyric. ALP, CCI, CZ North Indian 
classical music (NICM) has a rich history of three thousand years with influences from multiple cultures/



Linguistics (LINGUIST) 521

languages. This course will explore linguistic/cultural/musical aspects of NICM culture. Texts and music 
include Bandishes (songs), using four different languages–Sanskrit, Hindi, Urdu, and Brajbasha, exploration 
of multilingual and multicultural aspects of text and melody construction, fundamental monophonic musical 
structure and improvisation (NICM-based definitions of raaga (melody) and thala(rhythm). Theoretical 
principles include the Bhathkandes notation system. Live performances of main ragas and compositions in 
different dialects. Students learn to play tanpura, a traditional instrument. Instructor: Michael. One course. C-L: 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 212S
250. Symbolic Logic. CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 250; also C-L: Information Science + Studies
301. Advanced Spanish Grammar. CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 302
302S. French Phonetics. FL One course. C-L: see French 329S
304S. French Composition and Translation. CCI, FL, W One course. C-L: see French 304S
305S. Italian Sociolinguistics. CCI, CZ, FL, SS One course. C-L: see Italian 303S
306S. Korean Sociolinguistics. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 478S
308S. Bilingualism. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 308S
309S. Spanish in the U.S. CCI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see Spanish 309S
310. Translating Spanish-English and English-Spanish. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 
310; also C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 310
315S. Acquisition of Japanese as a Second Language. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 310S
358S. Sociolinguistic Landscapes: German Language, Society, and Identity. CCI, CZ, FL, SS One 
course. C-L: see German 358S
364. Gender and Language. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 364; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
232, International Comparative Studies 207, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 232
384S. The History, Theory, and Praxis of Translating Languages and Worlds. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 489S; also C-L: Literature 384S
387S. Mapping Language Justice in Durham and Beyond. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Romance 
Studies 387S
389S. Linguistic Human Rights in the Americas. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Romance Studies 
389S
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Linguistics. Advanced study 
of linguistics and languages on Duke-Approved programs at foreign institutions of higher learning. Topics differ 
by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Linguistics. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-01. Topics in Spanish Linguistics. FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 390S-5
396S. Language in Immigrant America. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 396S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 397S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 396S, International Comparative Studies 396S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 396S, Human Rights
397S. Narratives of Migration. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 397S; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 330S, International Comparative Studies 330S
409S. Identity and Linguistic Rights in the Spanish Speaking Americas. CCI, CZ, EI, FL One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 409S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 409S, Human 
Rights
410S. Linguistics and Law (DS4). SS Topics include surreptitious recordings as criminal evidence; 
pornography, slander, defamation, and libel; interpretation of laws and contracts; copyright, patents, and 
trademarks; jury instructions; jury selection; courtroom language as a unique register; the language of judges’ 
decisions; interrogations and confessions; official bilingualism; product warnings; clarity of instructions leading 



 Linguistics (LINGUIST)522

to potential liability issues. Instructor: Newcity. One course.
413. Language and Aging. NS, SS This course will examine language acquisition, maintenance and 
loss across the life cycle. Research will include experiments and data collection with healthy subjects and 
in pathology (including different aphasias and dementias). Special foci include cognitive neurolinguistic 
approaches to understanding acquisition and maintenance of languages (first, second, third, etc.) across 
different age groups, bi- and multilingualism in aging, hypotheses about cognitive reserve, use of imaging 
in understanding languages in the healthy and pathological brain, and developing new protocols for future 
research. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 413
437S. Language Development. SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 437S
450S. Junior/Senior Seminar in Linguistics. CCI, R, SS Theory and methods of comparative linguistics. 
Diachronic and synchronic approaches to the study of comparative linguistics in phonology, morphology, 
morphophonemics, syntax, and lexical categories in the context of the world’s languages. Both Indo-European 
and non- Indo-European languages included. Topics include theories of reconstruction, languages in contact, 
abductive processes, and questions of linguistic typology. Major research paper required. Instructor: Andrews, 
Butters, or Tetel. One course.
451. Language and Society. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see English 395; also C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 
385, Cultural Anthropology 212, International Comparative Studies 395, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 395, Human Rights
471S. Language and Politics: Global Perspectives. CCI, SS We will never speak a single language, 
or agree on the best way to organize society and politics for “the good life.” How do macro-politics affect the 
language(s) we choose to speak? What public policy initiatives can be deployed so that language is an accessible 
resource for all? Are there such things as language rights, and how can they be distributed and defended? These 
questions are not just academic, but essential to understanding the world(s) that we inhabit. This course takes 
a global and historical approach to the politics of language, examining the relationships between language, 
society, and the state. Instructor: Price. One course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 484S, Sociology 471S, 
Public Policy 208S
473AS. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS In-depth analysis of PET, fMRI, MEG, EEG/
ERP studies of multilingualism and their implications for linguistic theory. A close examination of the 
neuroanatomical and neurophysiological aspects of imaging studies and the importance of neurofunctional 
explanations play a central role in building new theoretical paradigms of acquisition, maintenance and loss of 
languages. Offered through Duke in Russia program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Andrews. One 
course. C-L: Russian 438AS, Neuroscience 438AS
473S. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS In-depth analysis of PET, fMRI, MEG, EEG/
ERP studies of multilingualism and their implications for linguistic theory. A close examination of the 
neuroanatomical and neurophysiological aspects of imaging studies and the importance of neurofunctional 
explanations play a central role in building new theoretical paradigms of acquisition, maintenance and loss of 
languages. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Russian 439S, Neuroscience 439S, Science & Society 439S
480S. Critical Discourse Analysis: Theory and Method. CCI, EI, R, SS Presents key theories and 
methodologies of critical discourse analysis (CDA) through substantive practice in analyzing language and 
discourse in real-world texts, with a focus on understanding ethical implications of how people, events and 
issues are represented. Theoretical frameworks from e.g. Foucault and Laclau & Mouffe are examined in the 
context of linguistic approaches from e.g. Saussure, Halliday and Blommaert. Primarily aimed at junior/senior 
Linguistics majors but open to upper-class/graduate students majoring in allied humanities/social science 
fields. Some knowledge of language/linguistics is helpful, though not necessary. Instructor: Price. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Linguistics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, under 
the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Linguistics 493. Consent of instructor and director of 



Linguistics (LINGUIST) 523

undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
497. Second Language Acquisition and Research. NS, R, SS Addresses historical and current 
perspectives on second language acquisition. SLA is the study of processes that contribute to learning a language 
other than the first language. The course will focus on linguistic, cognitive, and sociocultural processes that 
contribute to the acquisition of the L2. Research methodologies, neuroimaging, and data interpretation will 
be emphasized. Recommended prerequisite (for Neuroscience majors): Neuroscience 101 or 102. Instructor: 
Andrews. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 450, Neuroscience 450
498. Cyber Law: Law, Language, and Computers. EI, STS Cyber law refers to the legal principles that 
govern the creation, use of computers, software, and computer networks, or that relate to the transfer, use, and 
storage of electronic information. In this course we will analyze the key legal principles concerning: ownership 
of the designs of integrated circuits and computer software; crimes involving the use of computers; protection 
of electronic data, with particular concern for the protection of privacy interests; freedom of expression on the 
internet. There will be several over-arching meta-themes in this course, and other related themes. This course 
is designed for students with little or no familiarity with the American legal system. Instructor: Newcity. One 
course.
501. Cognitive and Neurolinguistics. NS, R, SS The interrelationship between language and brain as 
described and analyzed in cognitive and neurolinguistics. Topics include localization theories, hemispheric 
dominance in language, language disorders, invasive and noninvasive scanning and imaging technologies 
(including ERP, EEG, fMRI, MEG), encoding and decoding of language at the phonological, morphological, 
syntactic, and semantic levels. Readings include scholarship from theoretical and cognitive linguistics, 
neurolinguistics, neurobiology, neuropsychiatry, and neuropsychology. Major research project required in form 
of research paper, laboratory or imagining experiment, or IRB document. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: 
Russian 510, Neuroscience 501S
502S. Language, Brain, and Human Behavior. R, SS, STS Explores the intersection of cognition and 
language by looking at a variety of theories of language, including: traditional models that vary according to 
how much the capacity for language is attributed to “the genes” or to “the environment” and newer models 
that question and redescribe traditional definitions of terms such as “nature,” “nurture,” “genetic code,” and 
“language.” How traditional and new models of language interpret the capacity for language in its relationship to 
the neurosciences, the cognitive sciences, and the social sciences. Instructor: Tetel. One course. C-L: Psychology 
670S
503S. Language Evolution and Acquisition. R, SS Both the phylogeny and ontogeny of language, i.e., 
both the wide and growing variety of scripts for the evolution of language in the human species and the various 
approaches to the emergence of language in the individual. The emergence of language in the individual and the 
particular language(s) the individual is exposed to, making linguistic relativity an important topic. Instructor: 
Tetel. One course. C-L: English 503S
506S. Semiotics and Linguistics (DS4). ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 506S
510. Brain and Language. NS, R The relationship of brain and language is explored through a variety of 
methodologies and approaches, including studies of first and second language acquisition across cultures, 
multilingualism, language disorders. Neuroimaging studies (including electrophysiological and hemodynamic 
techniques) are central to understanding current neurobiological, neurophysiological and neurolinguistic 
perspectives of representation of language(s) in the brain. Readings and case studies focus on the latest 
theoretical contributions to the field. IRB certification and data collection are required. Instructor: Andrews. 
One course. C-L: Psychology 575, Neuroscience 510
512. Structure of French. FL One course. C-L: see French 512
512S. Topics in Spanish Linguistics. FL, R, SS One course. C-L: see Spanish 512S
518S. Approaches and Practices in Second Language Pedagogy. CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 518S; also C-L: Education 518S
528S. Recent and Contemporary Philosophy. CZ One course. C-L: see Philosophy 628S
560. History of the German Language. One course. C-L: see German 560; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 607



 Linguistics (LINGUIST)524

561S. Second Language Acquisition and Applied Linguistics. SS One course. C-L: see German 561S
562S. Old Norse: Introduction to the Language of Viking Scandinavia. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
German 510S; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 609S
564. Russian and Slavic Linguistics. SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 564
590. Special Topics. Study of theoretical and applied linguistics. Contrast and comparison of both theoretical 
approaches and language groups is required. Topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Linguistics. Same as Linguistics 590 except instruction is provided in a seminar 
format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
595. Language, Music and Dementia: Neuroscience Approaches. NS, R, SS Exploration of the 
neuroscience data on cognitive processing of languages and music in healthy subjects and pathology. Specific 
attention given to the interaction of language(s) and music in the brain, music therapy and dementia, and 
multilingualism and dementia. Topics include the role of languages and music in building cognitive reserve, 
linguistic breakdown and cognitive decline in healthy aging and dementia, cross-cultural studies of pitch 
and timbre perception across languages of the world, possible benefits of multilingualism in healthy aging, 
interactions of singing and memory, integration of auditory and visual neural systems in language and music. 
Instructor: Andrews, Linnartz. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 595, Music 595

The Major
The major is composed of ten courses, eight of which must be at the 200 level or above. The courses combine 

empirical methods with theory. They are devised to provide depth and breadth in linguistic theory, the different 
schools of linguistics, the history and development of linguistic thought, and the interdisciplinary aspects of 
linguistics in the context of languages and cultures. Majors must take Linguistics 201 and 202, which define the 
fundamental questions of linguistic theory in the context of the world’s languages; and in the junior or senior year 
the capstone course Linguistics 450S, which adds cohesion to the major. For depth, the student is required to take 
three courses from the list of theory courses, which provide the necessary theoretical and empirical constructs 
for the study of linguistics. In addition, two courses are required in one of the concentrations in a specific area of 
linguistics. All majors are required to take at least two foreign language courses at or above the 300 level. Students 
may petition to add courses to the list of courses that count toward the theory and disciplinary areas below (II 
and III).

Major Requirements
The linguistics major is composed of ten courses, eight of which must be at the 200 level or above. The 

courses combine empirical methods with theory. They are devised to provide depth and breadth in linguistic theory, 
the different schools of linguistics, the history and development of linguistic thought, and the interdisciplinary 
aspects of linguistics in the context of languages and cultures. The requirements are as follows:

• Introductory Linguistics Courses (two):
• Linguistics 201 (Introduction to Linguistics)
• Linguistics 202 (Languages of the World)

• Capstone: Linguistics 450S (Jr./Sr. Seminar in Linguistics) or Linguistics 595 (Language, Music and 
Dementia)

• Theory: Three courses in the study of theoretical linguistics. Courses to be chosen from the following 
list:

Regularly Scheduled Linguistics Courses and Special Topics Courses
203S. Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics
204. English Historical Linguistics
206. Variety in Language
207. Psychology of Language (cross-listed)
209. Philosophy of Language
216S. Neuroscience and Human Language
250. Symbolic Logic
303. Fundamentals of Spanish Linguistics
305S. Italian Sociolinguistics



Linguistics (LINGUIST) 525

306S. Korean Sociolinguistics
308S. Bilingualism
364. Gender and Language
410S. Linguistics and Law
451. Language and Society
471S. Language and Politics
473S. Neuroscience and Multilingualism (cross-listed w/Neuroscience 439S)
480S. Critical Discourse Analysis
493. Research Independent Study
490S. Special Topics in Linguistics 
494. Research Independent Study
497. Second Language Acquisition and Research
501. Cognitive and Neurolinguistics
502S. Language, Brain, and Human Behavior
506. Semiotics and Linguistics 
510. Brain and Language
561S. Second Language Acquisition and Applied Linguistics
590. Special Topics
590S. Special Topics in Linguistics 
595. Language, Music and Dementia

• Disciplinary Areas. Two courses in one of the areas listed below. No course taken for credit as theory 
may be double-counted to fulfill the disciplinary concentration requirement. Qualifying courses are 
listed above under the heading “Regularly Scheduled Linguistics Courses and Special Topics Courses.” 
Disciplines include:
• Asian and Middle Eastern studies
• Cultural anthropology
• English
• German
• Italian
• Neuroscience
• Philosophy
• Psychology
• Romance studies
• Slavic and Eurasian studies
• Spanish

• Junior/Senior Seminar in Linguistics (Linguistics 450S) or Language, Music and Dementia 
(Linguistics 595). The capstone course for the major, usually taken in the junior or senior year.

• Language Requirement. Two semester courses in a single language other than English at or above 
the 300 level, excluding languages in which the student possesses CEFR C2 proficiency in speech and 
writing. Advisor’s approval is required in order to determine the language chosen for the major. The 
specific language courses are too numerous to list here. Advisors should also be consulted for specific 
approval of the language choice if it does not conform to the list below: Arabic, Chinese, French, 
German, Greek, Hebrew, Hindi, Italian, Japanese, Korean, Latin, Polish, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish. 

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The linguistics program offers work leading to Graduation with Distinction. See the program chair.
Procedure for Selection of Students. An overall GPA of 3.3 and GPA of 3.5 in the major are required. 

The process for admission to the Graduation with Distinction program is initiated by the submission of a research 
proposal to a faculty advisor by the end of the second semester of the junior year.

Expected Product. The central requirement is an honors thesis prepared by the student under faculty 
supervision. The thesis generally consists of three to five chapters with an extensive bibliography.

Evaluation Procedure. Completion of the thesis, its evaluation, and its defense before a three-member 
faculty committee warrants Graduation with Distinction.

Levels of Distinction. The honors thesis committee will decide to grant distinction and at what level 
(Distinction, High Distinction, Highest Distinction) based on the quality of the completed work.

Special Courses Required. The program consists of two courses:
1. Research Independent Study (Linguistics 493). Taken in the fall semester of the senior year, 



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)526

this course is devoted to development of the honors thesis and includes close supervision of the writing 
stage of the project by a faculty member selected by the student. 

2. Capstone Course (Linguistics 450S or 595). The second course is the capstone course required 
for all linguistics majors, which must be one of the following courses: Linguistics 450S, Senior Seminar 
in Linguistics, or Linguistics 595, Language, Music and Dementia.

Additional research independent study courses may be taken. Independent study courses are above and 
beyond the ten courses required for the major. 

The Minor 
Requirements: Five courses in linguistics, three of which must be at the 200 level or above. Usually, two 

of these courses are Linguistics 201 and Linguistics 202.

Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program
Professor Chow, Chair; Associate Professor Viego, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Chow, Dainot-
to, Hansen, Hardt, Jameson, R. Khanna, Mignolo, Moi, and Wiegman; Associate Professors Hadjioannou, Motta-
hedeh, and Viego; Assistant Professors Bassiri and Reilly; Research Professor Garreta

A major and a minor are available in this program. 
Both major and minor include a required course, a set of core literature courses, and some electives. The 

general rule for identifying core literature courses is that they are numbered from 50-99, 150-199, 300 to 399, 
450-499, and 600-699. In addition a few courses not in this range are core courses; these courses can be identified 
by the name of the professor: the rule here is that any course taught by any above listed literature faculty member 
regardless of its number is a core literature course.

Courses in Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)
80S. Special Topics: Introduction to Literature. Introduction to the study of literature and other forms of 
cultural expression, such as film. Different introductory approaches will be used in each section (for example, a 
systematic account of literary genres, a historical survey of ideas and forms of fiction, concepts of authorship and 
subjectivity, or of literary meaning and interpretation). More than one national literature or culture represented. 
May be taken twice for credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Introduction to African American Studies. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 102
110. Introduction to Film Studies. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 289; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 278, English 181, Documentary Studies 264, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
190. Special Topics in Literature. Introduction to the study of literature and other forms of cultural 
expression, such as film. Different introductory approaches will be used in each section (for example, a 
systematic account of literary genres, a historical survey of ideas and forms of fiction, concepts of authorship and 
subjectivity, or of literary meaning and interpretation). More than one national literature or culture represented. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics in the Focus Program. Topics vary. Open only to students in the Focus Program. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics: Introduction to Literature. Introduction to the study of literature and other forms 
of cultural expression, such as film. Different introductory approaches will be used in each section (for example, 
a systematic account of literary genres, a historical survey of ideas and forms of fiction, concepts of authorship 
and subjectivity, or of literary meaning and interpretation). More than one national literature or culture 
represented. Instructor: Staff. One course.
198FS. Performing Science: Experimentation, Collaboration, and Artistry. ALP, R, STS One 
course. C-L: see Science & Society 198FS; also C-L: English 198FS, Theater Studies 198FS
199. LGBTQ/Queer Cinema and Cultural Production. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 199; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 198



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 527

201. Introduction to Global Cultural Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Introductory course for the Literature 
Major in Global Cultural Studies. Examines how the work of the humanities provides conceptual and analytic 
skills for processing complex textual, cultural, scientific, mediatic, and ethical information in circulation in the 
contemporary world. Begins by asking what Global Cultural Studies is and why exploring culture in a global 
frame is important in our world today. Focuses on a particular area of cultural production and combines 
theoretical and historical analysis with concrete exploration of films and other media, literary texts, and other 
cultural material. Instructor: Staff. One course.
202S. Introduction to Performance Studies. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 202S; 
also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 219S, Visual and Media Studies 205S, English 202S
205. The Problem of Love in Western Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 225; 
also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 304
211. Indian Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 151; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 231
212. World of Korean Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 171; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 234, Cultural Anthropology 255
213. Japanese Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 161; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 232
214. Master Filmmakers of Chinese Cinemas. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 129; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 235
215. Italian Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 380; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 308, 
Theater Studies 276
216S. Trauma and Nostalgia: East European Film in the 21st Century. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 288S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 284S, International Comparative 
Studies 288S
217. Contemporary Israeli Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
143; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 248, Jewish Studies 241, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 214, 
Islamic Studies
218. Existentialist Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see German 386; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 372, Visual and Media Studies 283
220. Film Genres. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 267
222. Performance Art History and Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 344; also 
C-L: Information Science + Studies 275, Theater Studies 235, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 276
223. Film Noir. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 282; also C-L: German 270
223S. Film Noir. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 282S; also C-L: German 270S
225. Spies Like Us: Screening Cold War Espionage. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 270; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 262, Visual and Media Studies 258
229S. Space-Body-Image. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 229S; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 226S
230A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey (Service-Learning). ALP, 
CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 359A; also C-L: Documentary Studies 359A, Innovation 
and Entrepreneurship 359A, Documentary Studies
239S. Korean Literature and Culture in Translation: Local and Global Connections. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 172S
240. The Devil’s Pact: Faust and the Faust Tradition. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see German 370; 
also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 345
241S. Around the Bloc: Cold War Culture in the USSR and Eastern Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 240S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 259S



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)528

243. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201; also C-L: African & African American Studies 104, International 
Comparative Studies 106, Spanish 160
243S. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201S; also C-L: Spanish 160S, African & African American Studies 104S, 
International Comparative Studies 106S
244. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Italian 220; also C-L: 
German 243, English 244, Jewish Studies 243, International Comparative Studies 212
245. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Italian 481; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 450, Religion 262, History 253
246. Flaubert’s Brain: Neurohumanities. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see French 481; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 241
248S. Chinese Literature and Culture in Translation. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 132S
249. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 240; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 242, Visual and Media Studies 214, International 
Comparative Studies 265, Political Science 248
249S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies 240S; also C-L: Political Science 248S, International Comparative Studies 265S, 
Cultural Anthropology 440S, Visual and Media Studies 214S, Information Science + Studies 242S, Information 
Science + Studies
250. Moral Dilemmas in Philosophy and Literature. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 250; 
also C-L: Study of Ethics 258
250FS. Alien America: Immigrant Experiences in Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 250FS
250S. Indigenous Journeys in South Asian Film and Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies 252S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 251S
251. Arab Cultures: Literature, Politics, History. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 210; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 209
252. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see German 262; also C-L: English 287
252D. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney. ALP, CCI, 
CZ One course. C-L: see German 262D; also C-L: English 287D
260S. Freud and Sexuality. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 372S; 
also C-L: Study of Sexualities 310S, Psychology 322S
261S. Freud and Feminism: The Unconscious. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 373S
263S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 341S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 275S, Jewish Studies 266S, 
Documentary Studies
273. What Is Europe?. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 201; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 240
274. Imagining Europe: Arts, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see French 429; also 
C-L: Art History 202, Visual and Media Studies 202
276S. Turkish History through the Novels of Orhan Pamuk. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 296S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 345S, History 283S, Islamic 
Studies



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 529

279S. Docu-Poetry: Real Life Truths Outside and Inside the Poetic Narrative. ALP, EI, W One 
course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 279S; also C-L: English 279S
280. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see German 380; also C-L: Philosophy 286, 
Political Science 378, Marxism and Society
280D. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see German 380D; also C-L: Philosophy 
286D, Political Science 378D
281. American Apocalypse: Beat Generation Spirituality. ALP, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Religion 281; also C-L: English 281
282S. Modernism and the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see English 282S; also C-L: Art History 
281S, German 282S, Romance Studies 282S
285. Existentialism. ALP, CCI, EI Existentialism in philosophy and literature. Key themes will be existence, 
ethics, meaning of life, freedom, death, and writing. Texts may include writings by Kierkegaard, Nietzsche, 
Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Heidegger, Sartre, Camus, Beauvoir, Fanon, Murdoch and others. Instructor: Flanagan and 
Moi. One course. C-L: Philosophy 285, English 285
286. German History Through Film. ALP, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 286; also C-L: History 
255, Visual and Media Studies 287
290. Special Topics in International Literature and Culture. Topics in international culture, examined 
through literary texts, film, and other media. Organized according to trends, topics, and genres. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
290-2. Special Topics in National Cinema. Understanding nationhood through film culture. Industrial 
base, reception history, and critical context for development of national cinemas. Exemplary films from a range 
of periods. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Literature. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-1. Special Topics in International Literature and Culture. Seminar version of Literature 290. 
One course.
290S-2. Special Topics in National Cinema. Understanding nationhood through film culture. Industrial 
base, reception history, and critical context for development of national cinemas. Exemplary films from a range 
of periods. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Literature. Seminar version of 290A. 
Topics vary by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295S. Sex Work: The Politics of Sexual Labor. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 352S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 295S, Sociology 295S
298S. Revealing Histories: Polish Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Polish 298S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 297S
301S. Theory Today: Introduction to the Study of Literature. ALP Introduction to major areas of 
research in Global Cultural Studies with focus on specific theoretical issues of contemporary concern in various 
subfields of global culture. Required for majors. One course. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 303S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 301S
302. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS Tracks digital life and creative expression 
of groups online in a close study of images, captions and hyperlinked tags. Examines rituals, symbols and 
cultural patterns that structure everyday life of digital tribes online and investigates impact of digital and social 
media (Twitter, Instagram Facebook, Periscope) on the constitution of communities online and offline. Studying 
varied array of digital tribes: tribes of the deaf, of oil rig workers, of Hindu worshippers, of prison wives and 
laptop entrepreneurs, students learn about underlying myths, rituals, and cultural symbols that connect groups 
of people online. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320, Visual 
and Media Studies 324, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 402, Information Science + Studies 302



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)530

302S. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS Tracks digital life and creative expression 
of groups online in a close study of images, captions and hyperlinked tags. Examines rituals, symbols and 
cultural patterns that structure everyday life of digital tribes online and investigates impact of digital and social 
media (Twitter, Instagram Facebook, Periscope) on the constitution of communities online and offline. Studying 
varied array of digital tribes: tribes of the deaf, of oil rig workers, of Hindu worshipers, of prison wives and 
laptop entrepreneurs, students learn about underlying myths, rituals, and cultural symbols that connect groups 
of people online. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 320S, Visual 
and Media Studies 349S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 402S, Information Science + Studies 302S
303S. Fiction/Reality: Reality Hunger in Recent Literature. ALP, CCI Inspired by Marcel Proust and 
W. G. Sebald, and working alongside Annie Ernaux, contemporary writers such as Karl Ove Knausgård, Rachel 
Cusk, Jenny Offill, and Teju Cole undermine traditional divides between fiction, memoir, and essay-writing, 
and challenge our understanding of what a novel is. How are we to understand this “reality hunger”? Does it 
entail new ideas about subjectivity and identity? Is it a return to realism? Or does it We will read contemporary 
literature from different countries alongside theories of language and reality, realism, the novel, and reading. 
We may study theoretical texts by Wittgenstein, Lukács, Adorno, Barthes, Orwell, Arendt, Shields, Felski, and 
others. Instructor: Moi. One course. C-L: English 385S
306S. Reading Literature in French. ALP, CCI, FL, W One course. C-L: see French 306S
316S. Film Theory. ALP, STS Recent critical developments in Marxist aesthetics, structuralism, semiotics 
of the image, feminist film theory. History and theory of film technology. Both experimental and Hollywood 
narrative films. Instructor: Hadjioannou or Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 298S, 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
317S. Media Theory. STS Introduction to the material and technical infrastructure that informs and 
constrains the production and dissemination of knowledge. Exploration of cultural impact of technical media 
from writing to the internet. Combines historical and theoretical discussion with hands-on experimentation 
with various media, including the codex book, phonography and sound registration technology, photography, 
cinematography, video, virtual reality, digital computation, and the internet. Instructor: Hansen. One course. 
C-L: Information Science + Studies 214S, Visual and Media Studies 328S
318S. American Independent Cinema. ALP, CCI Examination of the emergence, establishment, and 
transformations of American indie film. Addresses main genres, key films and prominent directors by looking 
at the aesthetic characteristics of indie films, as well as the social and institutional contexts (primarily its 
relationship to Hollywood cinema) that led to the creation and important impact of this filmmaking practice. 
Topics include Midnight Movies of the 70s, New American Cinema, Trash Cinema, Art Cinema, Black Indie 
Cinema, New Queer Cinema, Generation X, Smart Cinema, Neo Noir, and the Pulp Fiction success story. 
Instructor: Hadjioannou. One course. C-L: English 389S, Theater Studies 373S, Visual and Media Studies 332S, 
Documentary Studies 322S
319. Ethics and Native American: American Indian Life and Literature. CCI, CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Study of Ethics 319; also C-L: History 317
319S. Expressing Immigrant Experience: The Russians. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Russian 
317S; also C-L: English 318S
320S. Social Movements and Social Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS Examines uses and abuses of social 
media by social movements. Interested in a broader historical study of mediating technologies and oppositional 
public sphere, course considers the uses of cameras, phones, cassette players, radio, and social media platforms, 
but also books, bodies, art, fashion, and automobiles as oppositional technologies. Studies political and ethical 
uses of technologies in social unrest. Investigates impact of technologies on social movements and social 
transformations in contemporary history. Student driven case studies will highlight contemporary engagement 
with social media by networked social movements. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: African & African 
American Studies 247S, International Comparative Studies 320S, Latin American Studies 320S, Information 
Science + Studies 323S, Visual and Media Studies 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
323S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 318S, Human Rights
325S. Understanding Mediation. ALP, CCI, CZ Examines experience as always mediated. How does 
text mediate expression, or language mediate subjectivity? How do images mediate power, or sounds mediate 



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 531

resistance? How does computation mediate agency, or networks mediate thought? But also, how do nations 
mediate globalization, or oil mediate energy? And how do bodies mediate liveness, or the environment mediate 
history? Moves from particular media forms and examples (language, literature, the fine and performing arts, 
audiovisual media, computational media) to focus on key theoretical concepts and debates of critical theory 
from twentieth and twenty-first centuries. Crosses national boundaries to understand mediation from global 
perspective. Instructor: Hadjioannou. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 316S, English 480S, Theater 
Studies 249S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 325S, Documentary Studies 358S
328S. Literary Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 328S; also C-L: 
Religion 326S
329S. Undocumented America in Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 330S; also C-L: Romance Studies 330S, Cultural Anthropology 329S
331. Beat Generation/Russian New Wave: Cultural Dissent in the Cold War. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, 
W One course. C-L: see Russian 330; also C-L: English 378
332S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Study of primary models and 
theories of social movements developed in fields of Sociology and Political Science. Readings provide vocabulary 
and conceptual framework for understanding how people organize, how social movements use media, role of 
leadership, meaning of success, and several other basic issues. Focus on social movements of last few decades. 
Students will conduct group projects on a selected contemporary social movement. Contemporary social 
movements considered include Occupy, 15M movement in Spain, Gezi Park encampment in Turkey, urban 
protests in Brazil, and Arab Spring uprisings. Instructor: Hardt. One course. C-L: Sociology 323S, Political 
Science 313S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 313S, Human Rights
333S. Bad Behavior. CZ, EI, SS, STS What does it mean to behave badly? How is ‘bad behavior’ 
distinguished from actions that are otherwise described as evil or criminal? This course addresses these 
questions by examining ideas of deviance, wrongdoing, and misconduct in the nineteenth, twentieth, and 
twenty-first centuries—that is, modern behavioral categories that are considered to be aberrant without 
necessarily being strictly defined as transgressions of the law. We will consider how bad behavior concerns the 
disruption of implicit social norms rather than the explicit violation of legal or moral codes. Instructor: Bassiri. 
One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 333S, Sociology 330S
336. Introduction to US Latino/a Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Spanish 336; also C-L: 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 336
337. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see Italian 337; 
also C-L: English 237, Jewish Studies 337
339. El cine político en américa Latina. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 339; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 383, Latin American Studies 327
341S. Perspectives on the Amazon. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Portuguese 341S; also C-L: Latin 
American Studies 341S
342A. Dante and the Art of Hell. ALP, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 342A; also C-L: Art History 
342A, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 342A
343. African Americans, Mass Incarceration and Citizenship. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 345; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
345, Human Rights
344. Poetics of Murder. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see German 284
345S. Popular Fictions. ALP Three popular genres, science fiction/fantasy, the western, and detective 
fiction, and how they reflect aspirations and cultural anxieties about matters such as gender. Open to juniors and 
seniors only. Instructor: Willis. One course. C-L: English 375S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 252S
350. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI Over the last three decades we have witnessed the speedy rise of the 
“neurosciences,” an historical event characterized by some “neuro-cultures” and “neuro-subjects.” In this course 
we will track this history and ask what change in meaning might “neuro” effect in the disciplines that were 
previously “neuro”-free. If there is a neuro-turn in the humanities and social sciences, what is it that’s “turning”? 



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)532

We will consider the centrality of brain research in these discussions to ask questions about the meaning of 
“personhood/subjectivity,” “human/post human,” “mind/body,” “self/ego,” and “emotion/affect.” Instructor: 
Viego. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 250, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 350, Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 350, Romance Studies 350
350S. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI Over the last three decades we have the witnessed the speedy rise of 
the “neurosciences,” an historical event characterized by some as a “neuro-revolution” that has given rise to a 
“neuro-society,” “neuro-cultures,” and “neuro-subjects.” In this seminar we will track this history and ask what 
change in meaning might “neuro” effect in the disciplines that were previously “neuro”-free. If there is a neuro-
turn in the humanities and social sciences, what is it that’s “turning”? We will consider the centrality of brain 
research in these discussions to ask questions about the meaning of “personhood/subjectivity,” “human/post 
human,” “mind/body,” “self/ego,” and “emotion/affect.” Instructor: Viego. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 250S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 350S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 350S, Romance Studies 
350S
351. Contemporary Novel. ALP One course. C-L: see English 377; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 377
351S. Contemporary Novel. ALP One course. C-L: see English 377S; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 377S
352S. Digital Storytelling and Interactive Narrative. ALP, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information 
Science + Studies 351S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 357S
352SA. Digital Storytelling. ALP, STS, W One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 351SA; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 357SA
361. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Cultural Anthropology 360; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 360, Sociology 360, International 
Comparative Studies 369
361S. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Cultural Anthropology 360S; also C-L: Public Policy 358S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 360S, Sociology 
360S, International Comparative Studies 369S
362D. What Is Beauty?. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 360D; also C-L: Art History 360D, 
English 362D
365S. Love, Marriage, Education: Theories About Women from Rousseau to Beauvoir. ALP, 
CCI Classic debates about women’s place in the family and society from 1789 to to 1949. Focus on three 
historical periods: 1790-1810; 1860-1880; 1920-1950, and two countries: France and England. Key texts by 
Mary Wollstonecraft, John Stuart Mill, Virginia Woolf and Simone de Beauvoir will be placed in conversation 
with literature and philosophy from their own time. Thus Wollstonecraft will be examined with Descartes, 
Rousseau, Mme de Staël and Hegel, while Mill will be read with Henry James and Henrik Ibsen. The course will 
develop the skills required to read philosophy with literature, and literature with philosophy. Instructor: Moi. 
One course. One course. C-L: Philosophy 274S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 365S, English 388S, 
Study of Sexualities
367A. Jewish Berlin. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 367A; also C-L: Jewish Studies 367A, 
International Comparative Studies
368. German Jewish Culture from the Enlightenment to the Present. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see German 368; also C-L: Jewish Studies 368, Religion 343
369. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 
387; also C-L: Jewish Studies 369, History 261, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 387, 
Human Rights
370S. Russian Fiction and Film. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Russian 371S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies
373S. Recycled Cinema. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 375S; also C-L: Documentary 
Studies 375S



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 533

374S. Global Men and Masculinities. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 374S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 274S, Sociology 375S, History 229S
375. Latin American Literature in Translation. ALP, CCI Foundational and recent texts, crucial themes, 
obsessions, genres and stylistic strategies of Latin American culture. Readings include canonical authors such as 
Sarmiento, Garcia Marquez, Lispector, Cortazar; recent writers who address contemporary issues. Ethical and 
political dilemmas will be constantly examined. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 339, Spanish 361
377. Kafka and Cinema. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see German 372; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 371, Jewish Studies 372
379S. The Detective Novel. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 379S; also C-L: English 376S
380. Marxism and Society. CZ, EI, SS Introduction to Marx’s core concepts, such as alienation, 
commodity, and revolution. Includes examination of Marx’s own major historical & political analyses, his 
economic texts, and his philosophical writings. Students also gain familiarity with the role of Marxist thought in 
different fields and disciplines, including feminist theory, anthropology, history, political science, and literary 
studies. Instructor: Hardt. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 203, Education 239, Sociology 339, Political 
Science 371, International Comparative Studies, Marxism and Society
381S. Political Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 380S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 420S, Latin American Studies 380S
382S. Fictions That Mark the Moment. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 228S; also C-L: English 379S
384S. The History, Theory, and Praxis of Translating Languages and Worlds. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 489S; also C-L: Linguistics 384S
385. Mafia at the Movies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 385; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
385, Theater Studies 375
387. Moral Panics, Spectacle, and Everyday Life: Social Anxieties and Minorities. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 387; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 387
390. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-10. Special Topics in Literature and National Cultures, Ethnicity, Race. Literature as a part of 
specific national cultures; questions such as: How does literature articulate conceptions of nationality, ethnicity, 
and race? Does literature have a color? What is the relationship between national languages, dialects, and ethnic 
languages? What role does literature as an institution play in the constructions of nationhood? Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390-11. Special Topics in Third World or Postcolonial Literature and Cultures. Colonial and 
postcolonial literatures of India, New Zealand and Australia, Canada, Francophone and Anglophone Africa, the 
Caribbean, North and South America. Organized according to trends, topics, and genres. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-6. Special Topics in Gender and Sexuality. Different literary and/or theoretical approaches to 
questions of sex, gender, and sexuality. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-7. Special Topics in the Study of Literature in Relation to Other Disciplines. Lecture version of 
Literature 390S-7. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-12. Special Topics in World Media. Studies in the media and society in a national or international 
setting; offered only in a Duke study abroad program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-13. Special Topics in World Literature and Culture. Studies in literature and culture in a national 
or comparatist mode; offered only in a Duke study abroad program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)534

390S-1. Special Topics in Literary Genres. Studies in one or more literary genres or subgenres, such as the 
novel, drama, poetry, or the documentary novel, epic poetry, love lyrics, modernist drama, and so on. Focus on 
questions of genre and form, but other themes discussed may vary widely. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-10. Special Topics in Literature and National Cultures, Ethnicity, Race. Seminar version of 
Literature 390-10. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-11. Special Topics in Third World or Postcolonial Literature and Cultures. Seminar version of 
Literature 390-11. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-12. Topics in Psychoanalytic Theory and Criticism. In this seminar we will read key 
works in psychoanalytic theory by its inventor, Sigmund Freud such as Three Essays on a Theory of 
Sexuality, Interpretation of Dreams, Dora: An Analysis of a Case of Hysteria, and The Ego and the Id. We’ll 
also read the work of important psychoanalytic theorists, commentators, and historians that include Adam 
Phillips, Eli Zaretsky, Elisabeth Roudinesco, and Alenka Zupancicc. We will explore psychoanalytic theory by 
focusing on specific topics such as hysteria, perversion, sexuality, repression, the unconscious, and the id/ego/
superego. Instructor: Viego. One course.
390S-15. Special Topics in North American Literature and Culture. Seminar version of Literature 
390. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-2. Special Topics in Literary Movements. Historical, theoretical, and/or formal approaches to 
literary movements in different periods and cultures. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-3. Special Topics in Individual Authors. Seminar version of Literature 154. Biographic, historical, 
and/or stylistic approaches to one or two individual authors, as well as critical debates concerning their work. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-4. Special Topics in Film. Close study of a major genre, period, or director. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390S-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies. Seminar version of Literature 390-5. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390S-6. Special Topics in Gender and Sexuality. Seminar version of Literature 390-6. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390S-7. Special Topics in the Study of Literature in Relation to Other Disciplines. A comparative 
approach to the study of literature that draws on the methods and materials of other disciplines, such as 
sociology, history, anthropology, or philosophy. Focus on the methods of interdisciplinary study. Contents vary 
with instructors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-8. Special Topics in Culture and the Arts. Literature in relation to the plastic and visual arts, 
architecture, and photography. Topics will vary according to the instructor, for example: modernism and 
postmodernism, the avant-garde, identity, and nationalism in the art of a given period. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390S-9. Special Topics in Science and Culture. Approaches to the question of science and technology in a 
cultural context. Readings by scientists and scholars of science and society. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SA. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Non-research directed study on a previously-approved topic under the direction 
of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Instructor: Staff. One course.
410S. Contemporary French Fiction. ALP, CCI, FL, W Novels published in France during the past 
decade. Fashions, fads, new trends, succès de scandale, and prize winners. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
French 410S
412S. Cultures of New Media. ALP, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 434S; also C-L: 



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 535

Visual and Media Studies 412S, International Comparative Studies 432S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 425S
415S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 415S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 415S, Visual and Media Studies 416S, 
International Comparative Studies 415S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 415S
416S. Strange Masterpieces: Major Authors in French and Francophone Modernity. ALP, CCI, 
FL One course. C-L: see French 482S
417S. Critical Interventions in Middle East Studies and Policy. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 479S; also C-L: Public Policy 417S, History 417S, International Comparative 
Studies 408S, International Comparative Studies
420. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, R One course. C-L: see French 411; also 
C-L: History 420
420A. Poéticas de aquí y de allá / Thinking Language: Poetics from Here and There. ALP, FL One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 420A
426S. France-Asia: Cultural Transfers and Translations in a Globalized Context. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, FL, W One course. C-L: see French 426S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 426S, International 
Comparative Studies 413S
427S. Banlieues and Peripheries in French Contemporary Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
FL, W One course. C-L: see French 427S
430. Gender and the Law. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 401; 
also C-L: Public Policy 315, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 401
438S. Techno-Orientalism: Asian/America, (Post)Human and Science Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 438S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 438S, International 
Comparative Studies 407S, Study of Sexualities 438S, Visual and Media Studies 438S, Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 438S, International Comparative Studies
439. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 439; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 439, Visual and Media Studies 439, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 439
450. Foucault in Slow Motion. EI, SS Michel Foucault’s work has been a powerful influence shaping 
debates in the humanities and social sciences around the world. Intensive study of key aspects of his arguments, 
including history, discourse, repression, the will to knowledge, visibility, soul production, biopolitics, and the 
socioeconomics of governance. Will focus on his major books, select essays and interviews, as well as articles 
by some of his interlocutors. “Slow motion” is intended here as a methodological emphasis, highlighting both 
the deliberateness of this course’s approach and the intimate ways in which Foucault’s thinking partakes of the 
historically changing aesthetics and politics of seeing as well as of speaking. Instructor: Chow. One course.
450S. Foucault in Slow Motion. EI, SS Michel Foucault’s work has been a powerful influence shaping 
debates in the humanities and social sciences around the world. Intensive study of key aspects of his arguments, 
including history, discourse, repression, the will to knowledge, visibility, soul production, biopolitics, and the 
socioeconomics of governance. Will focus on his major books, select essays and interviews, as well as articles 
by some of his interlocutors. “Slow motion” is intended here as a methodological emphasis, highlighting both 
the deliberateness of this course’s approach and the intimate ways in which Foucault’s thinking partakes of the 
historically changing aesthetics and politics of seeing as well as of speaking. Instructor: Chow. One course.
455S. World of Gaming: Art, Theory, Technology, and Business of a Multi-Billion Dollar Global 
Industry. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 455S; also C-L: Art 
History 453S, Visual and Media Studies 455S
475S. Queer Theory. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 370S; also 
C-L: Study of Sexualities 470S, Marxism and Society
476S. Archiving and Visualizing Asia: Politics and Poetics of Knowledge Production. CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 476S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 411S, 
Visual and Media Studies 476S, History 448S, Documentary Studies 476S
479S. Dante at Duke and in the World. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 479S; also C-L: Medieval 



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)536

and Renaissance Studies 474S
482SA. Sex, Death, and a Little Love: Boccaccio’s Decameron. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see 
Italian 482SA; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 454SA
483. What Machiavelli Really Says. ALP, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 483; also C-L: History 
405, Political Science 483, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 473
486S. Ordinary Language Philosophy. ALP An introduction to one of the most powerful visions of 
language in the 20th century, focused on works by Wittgenstein, Austin, and Cavell. Instructor: Moi. One 
course. C-L: English 485S, Philosophy 486S
489S. Screening Europe. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see French 489S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 479S, Visual and Media Studies 489S
490-1. Special Topics in Theory. An advanced investigation of major concepts and principles in literary 
and/or cultural theory. Contents and methods vary with instructors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S-1. Special Topics Theory. An advanced investigation of major concepts and principles in literary and/
or cultural theory. Contents and methods vary with instructors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S-2. Special Topics in Literature. Special Topics in Literature. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Honors Thesis I. ALP, R, W First semester of a two-semester sequence, in which Literature majors 
begin the year-long honors program. No credit given for Literature 495 without completion of Literature 496. 
Does not count towards the ten Literature courses required for the major. Director of Undergraduate Studies 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
496. Honors Thesis II. ALP, R, W Continuation of Literature 495 in which Literature majors finish the 
year-long honors program. Does not count towards the ten Literature courses required for the major. Director of 
Undergraduate Studies consent required. Prerequisite: Literature 495. Instructor: Staff. One course.
507S. Mimesis in Theory, Embodied Practice, and Literary Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: 
see French 507S; also C-L: Art History 509S, English 581S
510. Citizen Godard. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see French 510; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 552
511S. Borderland and Battleground: A Journey Through Twentieth-Century Eastern Europe. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 596S
512S. Performing Gender/Exhibiting Race. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 512S
515S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 515S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 515S, International Comparative 
Studies 515S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 505S
520S. Performance Studies. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 533S
521S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 
541S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 541S, History 577S, Science & Society
522. Eco-Media: Studies in Planetary Futures. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
520; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 520
522S. Eco-Media: Studies in Planetary Futures. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 520S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 520S
525S. Art as Work: Valuing Labor in the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Dance 561S; 
also C-L: Visual Arts 571S, Visual and Media Studies 571S
530S. Seminar in Asian and Middle Eastern Cultural Studies. CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 505S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 540S
532S. Comparative Modernisms. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 532S; also C-L: German 535S
539S. Queer China. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 539S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 539S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 502S, Visual and Media Studies 539S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 539S, Human Rights



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 537

540S. Methods and Theories of Romance Studies. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Romance Studies 
501S
541. Medieval Fictions. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 530; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 642
542S. Literary Guide to Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 586S; also C-L: German 586S
543S. Reading Heidegger. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 540S; 
also C-L: Religion 560S
544S. Memory and Documentary Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Romance 
Studies 540S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 540S, Documentary Studies 540S, Latin American Studies 
540S
545S. Expanded Cinema: Cinema Outside the Movie Theater. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and 
Media Studies 640S; also C-L: Documentary Studies 640S
551S. Translation: Theory/Praxis. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 551S
557. Cultural Memory. ALP, CCI, R, W One course. C-L: see French 557; also C-L: History 557
571. East Asian Cultural Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
605; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 605, International Comparative Studies 605
572S. Antonio Gramsci and the Marxist Legacy. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Italian 588S
573S. Ethnohistory of Latin America. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 570S; 
also C-L: History 540S
580S. Jews and the End of Theory. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 541S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 541S, International Comparative Studies 541S
582. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Italian 582; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 603
583S. Dante Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 583S; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 615S
584S. Boccaccio Studies. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 584S; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 618S
590. Special Topics in Literature. Special topics in Literature. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Literature. Special topics in Literature. Instructor: Staff. One course.
609. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, R One course. C-L: see French 611; also 
C-L: History 611
610S. Basic Concepts in Cinema Studies. ALP Review of theory, methodology, and debates in study of 
film under three rubrics: mode of production or industry; apparatus or technologies of cinematic experience; 
text or the network of filmic systems (narrative, image, sound). Key concepts and their genealogies with the 
field: gaze theory, apparatus theory, suture, indexicality, color, continuity. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 610S
611S. Film Feminisms. ALP, CCI, CZ Philosophical debates and approaches to the female form in 
film theory and history. Phenomenology, cultural studies, Marxism, psychoanalysis, structuralism, post-
structuralism, as well as gaze theory, apparatus theory, and feminist film theory as they approach readings of the 
body, subjectivity and identity in cinema. Questions of spectatorship and the gendered subject. Screening and 
discussion of Hollywood and European avant garde films key to early debates, and of international films central 
to debates around the gendered subject and representation in modernity. Interrogation of feminist approaches 
to national cinemas. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 611S 
612S. Theories of the Image: The Image in Walter Benjamin. ALP Returning to Walter Benjamin’s Art 
Work essay and its various sources and revisions, this course will discuss recent engagements with Benjamin’s 
work in cinema, photography, and visual and media studies and will attempt to understand the role and 
functions of the faculty he coins “the mimetic” in modern culture. Readings will be drawn from the English 



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)538

translation of Benjamin’s Selected Writings, volumes 1-4, and including his work on photography, history, 
surrealism and his reviews of writers such as Charles Baudelaire. Readings will also include some of Benjamin’s 
own primary sources, such as the writings of Kracauer as well contemporary discussions of Benjamin’s work in 
academic journals. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: German 512S, Romance Studies 612S, Visual and 
Media Studies 612S
613S. Third Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS Exploration of the geopolitics of situatedness and distance as 
they refer to the film industry, investigating processes of production, distribution, and reception of Hollywood, 
Third World, and diasporic films, and studying classical and artisanal modes of production in film. Addresses 
questions of authorship and embodiment; human rights and interventionist filmmaking as they refer 
themselves to human states of liminality, global movements of populations and capital. Traces the experience 
of globalization, urbanization, alienation, violence, nostalgia for nature and homeland as represented in the 
filmic image. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 530S, International 
Comparative Studies 613S, Latin American Studies 613S, Visual and Media Studies 611S
614S. Thinking Digital Cinema. ALP, STS Review of debates regarding digital cinema. Exploration of 
impact of new media technologies on contemporary cinema cultures. Examines question of medium specificity, 
cinema ontology, conventions of analog cinema vs. digital cinema, mediation/remediation/media convergence, 
applications of CGI, interactivity, cinephilia and DVD consumption, and spectatorship. Explores a series of 
philosophical questions surrounding our understanding and experience of contemporary cinema. Includes one 
trip to a local museum or gallery to examine digital installation art. Instructor: Hadjioannou. One course. C-L: 
Theater Studies 671S, Visual and Media Studies 614S
615S. The #Selfie. CZ, EI, R, STS Focusing on digital self portraits that social media denizens have 
hashtagged “the selfie”, the course will trace two different histories 1) the global history of portraiture in the 
arts and photography from the 19th C to the present 2) the emergence of the modern idea of “everyday life” (i.e. 
the routine, the trivial, the unconscious, the unremarkable) as the exact antithesis of what has routinely been 
called “history”, all strongly associated with women and private life. These unpresentable phenomenon have 
challenged notions of the state, Capital, urban design, and copyright, indeed the body and the Beautiful. Student 
driven case studies highlight everyday engagements with social media. Instructor: Mottahedeh. One course. 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 615S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 615S, International Comparative 
Studies 615S
620S. Film-philosophers/Film-makers. ALP, CZ, STS Examines intersections between film, critical 
theory, and continental philosophy, from standpoint of spectatorship. Focuses on different approaches to 
film theory from a philosophical prism, and on different philosophers addressing film as a mediated visual 
interpretation of reality, the world, our own bodies, and societies within which we reside. Addresses film-making 
as an act of philosophical thought—of thinking about the world and representing subject’s position within the 
world. Topics include, existential phenomenology, Deleuzian metaphysics, feminism, semiotics, political theory. 
Instructor: Hadjioannou. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 622S, Theater Studies 620S, English 620S, 
Documentary Studies 620S
621S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar. ALP, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 650S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 650S, Art History 537S, 
Visual and Media Studies 561S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
622. Science Studies. ALP, STS Key texts and crucial issues in contemporary history, sociology, and 
philosophy of science—or, as the assemblage is sometimes called, ‘science studies.’ Focus on theoretical and 
methodological problems leading to a critiques of classical conceptions of knowledge and scientific truth, 
method, objectivity, and progress, and b the development of alternative conceptions of the construction and 
stabilization of knowledge and the relations between scientific and cultural practices. Readings include L. Fleck, 
K. Popper, P. Feyerabend, T. Kuhn, S. Shapin and S. Schaffer, and B. Latour. One course. C-L: Information 
Science + Studies
623. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America. 
ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 670; also C-L: Philosophy 570, Science & 
Society
624S. Post-Digital Architecture. ALP, R Impact of advanced technology on conceptions of architectural 
design, new urban environments, & the body since the mid-1990s. Postmodernism & role of time-based 



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 539

new media, game environments & virtual worlds technologies in the rise of digital architecture from the late 
1990s-2000s. Theoretical readings from Deleuze, Pask, Grosz, Massumi, Denari, Eisneman, Koolhaas, Lynn, 
Diller + Scofidio. Explores programs for post-digital architecture that integrate nano & biomimetic technologies, 
smart materials & protocells into self-organizing designs for living architecture & reflexive environments. 
Discuss how post-digital architecture will engage the work of Simondon, Spillers, Armstrong,others. Topics 
course. Instructor: Lenoir. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 624S
625S. Comparative Media Studies. ALP, STS Explores the impact of media forms on content, style, form, 
dissemination, & reception of literary & theoretical texts. Assumes media forms are materially instantiated 
& investigates their specificities as important factors in their cultural work. Puts different media forms into 
dialogue, including print, digital, sonic, kinematic & visual texts, & analyzes them within a theoretically 
informed comparative context. Focuses on twentieth & twenty-first century theories, literatures, & texts, esp. 
those participating in media upheavals subject to rapid transformations. Purview incl. transmedia narratives, 
where different versions of connected narratives appear in multiple media forms. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Information Science + Studies 615S, Visual and Media Studies 625S
630S. Phenomenology and Media. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, STS Examination of phenomenology both as a 
philosophical movement and as a resource for contemporary media theory. Attention centers on the classical 
phase of phenomenology (from Husserl to Merleau-Ponty), on more recent developments in phenomenology 
and post-phenomenology (Levinas, Derrida, Fink, Barbaras), and on correlations between phenomenology and 
media theory (Ihde, Stiegler, Flusser). Key topics include: reduction, experience, time-consciousness, sensation, 
world manifestation, differance, reversibility, de-presencing, worldliness, readiness-to-hand and thrownness. 
Instructor: Hansen. One course. C-L: Art History 630S, Information Science + Studies 630S, Visual and Media 
Studies 630S
631S. Seminar on Modern Chinese Cinema. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
631S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 631S
632. Questions of National Cinemas. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 631; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 632
632S. Whitehead, Bergson, James. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI An exploration of process philosophy, with 
particular attention to its relevance for contemporary issues in media, political economy, aesthetics, and culture. 
Focuses on three texts: Whitehead’s Process and Reality, Bergson’s Matter and Memory, and James’s Essays 
in Radical Empiricism. Other works by these philosophers and secondary literature on them will help establish 
context for arguments of these fundamental philosophical texts. Topics explored includes: process, radical 
empiricism, vitalism, memory, perception, monism, experience, speculative empiricism, actuality & potentiality, 
the virtual, the fringe, the superject, causal efficacy, society, prehension, & selection. Instructor: Hansen. One 
course. C-L: Information Science + Studies 632S, Art History 632S, Visual and Media Studies 632S
640S. Theory and Practice of Literary Translation. ALP, CCI, W Linguistic foundations, historical 
roles. contemporary cultural and political functions of literary translation. Readings in translation theory, 
practical exercises and translation assignments leading to a translation project. One course. C-L: German 511S, 
Islamic Studies
644. Modernism. Aspects of the “modern,” sometimes with emphasis on the formal analysis of specific 
literary and nonliterary texts (Joyce, Kafka, Mahler, Eisenstein); sometimes with a focus on theories of 
modernism (Adorno), or on the modernism/postmodernism debate, or on the sociological and technological 
dimensions of the modern in its relations to modernization, etc. Instructor: Jameson. One course.
672. Representation in a Global Perspective. ALP, CCI Problems of representation approached in ways 
that cross and question the conventional boundaries between First and Third World. Interdisciplinary format, 
open to exploration of historical, philosophical, archeological, and anthropological texts as well as literary and 
visual forms of representation. Instructor: Staff. One course.
681S. Wittgensteinian Perspectives on Literary Theory. ALP Key questions in literary theory 
reconsidered from the point of view of ordinary language philosophy (Wittgenstein, J. L. Austin, Cavell). Topics 
will vary, but may include: meaning, language, interpretation, intentions, fiction, realism and representation, 
voice, writing, the subject, the body, the other, difference and identity, the politics of theory. New perspectives 
on canonical texts on these subjects. Instructor: Moi. One course. C-L: English 582S, Philosophy 681S



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)540

682. The Intellectual as Writer. ALP, CZ History and theory of the literary role of the intellectual in society 
(e.g., in Augustan Rome, the late middle ages, the Renaissance, America, Latin America). Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
683. Studies in Legal Theory. A consideration of those points at which literary and legal theory intersect 
(e.g., matters of intention, the sources of authority, the emergence of professional obligation). Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
690. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-1. Special Topics in Literature of the Modern Era. Study of a particular author, genre, or theory of 
modern literature. Topics include changing understandings of authorship, questions of reception, translation, 
and the history of criticism. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-3. Topics in Cultural Studies. Instructors: Staff. One course.
690-4. Special Topics in Film. Selected film directors with attention to their visual style. Auteur theory or 
authorship as a way of understanding the cinematic work of European, American, Asian, or African masters of 
the form. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-6. Topics in Psychoanalytic Theory and Criticism. Instructor: Moi or Viego. One course.
690-7. Special Topics in Literature and History. Relationship of literary texts to varieties of historical 
experience such as wars, periods of revolutionary upheaval, periods of intense economic growth, “times of 
troubles,” or stagnation. Literary texts and historical content posed in such formal ways as the theoretical 
problem of the relationship between literary expression and form and a range of historical forces and 
phenomena. Instructor: Jameson. One course.
690-8. Special Topics in Literature: Paradigms of Modern Thought. Specialized study of the work 
of individual thinkers who have modified our conceptions of human reality and social and cultural history, 
with special emphasis on the form and linguistic structures of their texts considered as ‘language experiments.’ 
Topics vary from year to year, including: Marx and Freud, J.P. Sartre, and Walter Benjamin. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
690S. Special Topics in Literature. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-3. Topics in Cultural Studies. Contents and methods vary with instructors and from semester to 
semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-4. Special Topics in Film. Contents and methods vary with instructors and from semester to semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-8. Special Topics in Literature: Paradigms of Modern Thought. Specialized study of the work 
of individual thinkers who have modified our conceptions of human reality and social and cultural history, 
with special emphasis on the form and linguistic structures of their texts considered as ‘language experiments.’ 
Topics vary from year to year, including: Marx and Freud, J.P. Sartre, and Walter Benjamin. Seminar version of 
Literature 690-8. Instructor: Jameson or staff. One course.
691S. Black Sonic Culture—Analog to Digital. One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
622S; also C-L: English 691S, Music 691S
695S. Literature Seminar. ALP Contents and methods vary with instructors and from semester to semester. 
Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

The Major
The global cultural studies major of the Literature Program is an exciting course of study for undergraduates 

interested in investigating the forms of life and culture produced in today’s interconnected, globalized world. The 
major is committed to the notion that the humanities produce a distinct kind of knowledge that is essential for 
understanding and engaging the complexities of the contemporary social environment. The major’s courses in 
literary studies, critical theory, gender studies and queer theory, philosophy, political theory, film, visual culture, 
and new media form the foundation for such inquiry. With its distribution of courses across three domains of 
inquiry-Experience, Interpretation, and Medium-the major aims to provide students with the broad knowledge 



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 541

base and analytical skills that will prepare them for leadership roles in the twenty-first century. Graduates of 
the major have gone on to shape unique career trajectories in law, medicine, public policy, teaching, journalism, 
publishing, and the creative cultural industries, as well as to pursue graduate study at top programs in the 
humanities.

Requirements for the Major: The major in global cultural studies is composed of ten courses. All majors 
are required to take a gateway course, Literature 201S (Gateway to Global Cultural Studies), and an upper-level 
course, Literature 301S (Theory Today), as well as four core courses distributed across the three domains of 
inquiry—Experience, Interpretation, Medium—with at least one course selected from each domain. In addition, 
students must select three electives from across the humanities offerings at Duke and fulfill the “Senior Culminating 
Experience” requirement. For more information, visit https://globalculturalstudies.duke.edu. 

Interpretation Domain (I). The major method of the humanities is interpretation, understood as any 
kind of reading, decoding or deciphering of signs, sign-systems, languages, texts, artworks, and material artefacts. 
This category includes courses concerned with the practice of interpretation and reading, and/or the theoretical 
problems arising from the attempt to understand human signs and artefacts.

Experience Domain (E). The humanities investigate human existence as it is personally and collectively 
experienced. Human experience is always situated, always intertwined with specific historical, geographical, 
political, social, cultural, and economic conditions and contexts. This category includes courses concerned with 
identity, social and bodily life, and with theoretical problems arising from the attempt to demarcate agency from 
the broader environments out of which it emerges.

Medium Domain (M). A crucial dimension of the humanities involves attending to the history and 
technicity of the media in which culture is expressed, transmitted, and inherited. This category addresses 
the tension between meaning and materiality that stems from the inherent media specificity of every cultural 
expression, and range in scope from concretely situated notions of “genre,” “audience,” and “sense modality” to 
broader operations of “reflexivity” and “receptivity.”

Major in Global Cultural Studies with Concentration in Film and Media
The Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program also offers a film and media concentration, providing 

students the opportunity to pursue a flexible curriculum in global cultural studies with a focus on film and media 
issues. The film and media concentration is intended to work together with Duke’s Program in the Arts of the 
Moving Image.

Requirements: The major with a concentration in film and media is composed of ten courses. All majors 
are required to take the gateway course Literature 201S (Gateway to Global Cultural Studies), upper-level course 
Literature 301S (Theory Today), as well as Literature 110 (Introduction to Film Studies) and either Literature 316 
(Film Theory) or Literature 317 (Media Theory). For the remaining six courses, students must take at least two 
courses that focus on the study of film and/or media, and at least three of the six courses must be core literature 
courses. For more information, visit https://globalculturalstudies.duke.edu.

The Minor
The global cultural studies minor of the Literature Program offers Duke students an opportunity to 

complement their major field of concentration—whether it be computer science, environmental studies, 
economics, music, or mathematics—with a suite of courses designed to thematize the larger cultural contexts of 
their scholarly interests.

Requirements: The minor in global cultural studies is composed of five courses. All minors are required 
to take a gateway course (Literature 201S) as well as three core courses distributed across at least two of the three 
domains of humanistic inquiry (experience, interpretation, medium), and one elective. For more information, 
visit https://globalculturalstudies.duke.edu.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction 
To receive Graduation with Distinction students must satisfy university GPA requirements and submit an 

application by the beginning of the spring semester of their junior year. They must have a minimum overall GPA 
of 3.0, a GPA of 3.5 in the major, and an honors thesis grade of B+ or above. Students accepted into the distinction 
program must take the honors seminar sequence (Literature 495 and 496). A final grade will be issued at the end 
of the spring term. (A grade of “Z” will be issued at the end of the fall term.) Students must write an honors thesis 

https://globalculturalstudies.duke.edu
https://globalculturalstudies.duke.edu
https://globalculturalstudies.duke.edu


 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)542

(60 pages minimum) and submit it by the official submission date noted on a written and signed departmental 
agreement. Students will defend the thesis before a three-member committee consisting of the thesis advisor, 
director of undergraduate studies, and a third reader chosen from among the members of the literature faculty 
and affiliated faculty. The committee determines the grade for the thesis, which becomes the grade of the honors 
seminar sequence. The two honors seminars do not count toward the ten literature courses required for the major.

Domains of Inquiry for Program Courses

Experience Courses
143. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South
143S. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South
201. Introduction to Global Cultural Studies
202S. Introduction to Performance Studies
229S. Space-Body-Image
230A. Introduction to Global Los Angeles: An Interdisciplinary Survey
235S. Anthropology of Space
241S. Around the Bloc: Cold War Culture in the USSR and Eastern Europe
244S. Poetry, Desire & Religion
246D. Flaubert’s Brain: Neurohumanities
250S. Indigenous Journeys in South Asian Film and Literature
260S. Freud and Sexuality
261S. Freud and Feminism: The Unconscious
281. American Apocalypse: Beat Generation Spirituality
285. Existentialism
290. Special Topics in International Literature and Culture
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Literature
290SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Literature
290S-1. Special Topics in International Literature and Culture
295S. Sex Work: The Politics of Sexual Labor
301S. Theory Today: Introduction to the Study of Literature
319. Ethics and Native American: American Indian Life and Literature
319S. Expressing Immigrant Experience: The Russians
320S. Social Movements and Social Media
331. Beat Generation/Russian New Wave: Cultural Dissent in the Cold War
332. Social Movements in Age of Globalization
335S. Political Economies of the Global Image
343. African Americans, Mass Incarceration and Citizenship
367A. Jewish Berlin
368. German Jewish Culture from the Enlightenment to the Present 
369. Germany Confronts Nazism and the Holocaust 
372D. The Idea of Latin America
380. Marxism and Society
384S. The History, Theory, and Praxis of Translating Languages and Worlds
390. Special Topics in Literature
390-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies
390-6. Special Topics in Gender and Sexuality
390-10. Special Topics in Literature and National Cultures, Ethnicity, Race
390-11. Special Topics in Third World or Postcolonial Literature and Cultures
390S-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies
390S-6. Special Topics in Gender and Sexuality
390S-10. Special Topics in Literature and National Cultures, Ethnicity, Race
390S-11. Special Topics in Third World or Postcolonial Literature and Cultures
390S-15. Special Topics in North American Literature and Culture
415S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption
430. Gender and the Law
439. Queer China
471S. Marxism and Culture
475S. Queer Theory
486S. Ordinary Language Philosophy 
495. Honors Thesis I
496. Honors Thesis II
511S. Borderland and Battleground: A Journey Through Twentieth-Century Eastern Europe
515S. Interethnic Intimacies: Production and Consumption
530S. Seminar in Asian and Middle Eastern Cultural Studies
539S. Queer China
542S. Literary Guide to Italy
571. East Asian Cultural Studies 



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 543

580S. Jews and the End of Theory
615S. The #Selfie
623. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America
644. Modernism
672. Representation in a Global Perspective
690. Special Topics in Literature
690-1. Special Topics in Literature of the Modern Era
690-3. Topics in Cultural Studies
690-6. Topics in Psychoanalytic Criticism
690-8. Special Topics in Literature: Paradigms of Modern Thought
690S. Special Topics in Literature
690S-3. Topics in Cultural Studies
690S-8. Special Topics in Literature: Paradigms of Modern Thought
695S. Literature Seminar

Interpretation Courses
80S. Special Topics: Introduction to Literature
89S. First-Year Seminar
102. Introduction to African & African American Studies
190FS. Special Topics in the Focus Program
190S. Special Topics: Introduction to Literature
201. Introduction to Global Cultural Studies
205. The Problem of Love in Western Literature
229S. Space-Body-Image
239S. Korean Literature in Translation: Local and Global Connections
240. The Devil’s Pact: Faust and the Faust Tradition
242. The Existentialist Imagination
242D. The Existentialist Imagination
244. Modern European Short Fiction
245. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory and Paradise
246D. Flaubert’s Brain: Neurohumanities
247. Classics of Western Civilization: The German Tradition, 1750-1930
248S. Chinese Literature and Culture in Translation
250. Moral Dilemmas in Philosophy and Literature
252. Romantic Fairy Tales: Literary and Folk Fairy Tales from Grimms to Disney
260S. Freud and Sexuality
261S. Freud and Feminism: The Unconscious
273. Europe in Theory
276S. Orhan Pamuk and World Literature
280. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud
280D. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud
285. Existentialism
290. Special Topics in International Literature and Culture
290S-1. Special Topics in International Literature and Culture
301S. Theory Today: Introduction to the Study of Literature
316. Film Theory
317. Media Theory
319. Ethics and Native American: American Indian Life and Literature
328S. Literary Islam
338S. German Language Graphic Novels
344. Poetics of Murder
345S. Popular Fictions
346S. Utopian Writing 
351. Contemporary Novel
351S. Contemporary Novel 
360S. Women Writers
365S. Love, Marriage, Education: Theories About Women from Rousseau to Beauvoir
371. Problems in Global Culture
371S. Problems in Global Culture
375. Latin American Literature in Translation
376. Latin-American Literature in Translation
377. Kafka and Cinema
380. Marxism and Society 
384S. The History, Theory, and Praxis of Translating Languages and Worlds
385. Mafia at the Movies
390. Special Topics in Literature
390-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies
390-7. Special Topics in the Study of Literature in Relation to Other Disciplines 
390-10. Special Topics in Literature and National Cultures, Ethnicity, Race 
390-11. Special Topics in Third World or Postcolonial Literature and Cultures 



 Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT)544

390A-13. Special Topics in World Literature and Culture
390S. Special Topics in Literature 
390S-1. Special Topics in Literary Genres 
390S-2. Special Topics in Literary Movements 
390S-3. Special Topics in Individual Authors 
390S-5. Selected Topics in Feminist Studies
390S-6. Special Topics in Gender and Sexuality
390S-7. Special Topics in the Study of Literature in Relation to Other Disciplines
390S-8. Special Topics in Culture and the Arts 
390S-9. Special Topics in Science and Culture 
390S-10. Special Topics in Literature and National Cultures, Ethnicity, Race 
390S-11. Special Topics in Third World or Postcolonial Literature and Cultures 
390S-15. Special Topics in North American Literature and Culture 
390SA. Special Topics in Literature
412S. Cultures of New Media
420. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction 
430. Gender and the Law
475S. Queer Theory
482SA. Sex, Death, and a Little Love: Boccaccio’s Decameron
490-1. Special Topics in Theory 
490S-1. Special Topics Theory
490S-2. Special Topics in Literature
495. Honors Thesis I 
496. Honors Thesis II
521S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science
530S. Seminar in Asian and Middle Eastern Cultural Studies
540S. Methods and Theories of Romance Studies
541. Medieval Fictions
541S. The Symbolist Movement in the Arts & European Thought
543S. Reading Heidegger
551S. Translation: Theory/Praxis
571. East Asian Cultural Studies
572S. Antonio Gramsci and the Marxist Legacy
573S. Ethnohistory of Latin America
580S. Jews and the End of Theory
583S. Dante Studies
584S. Boccaccio Studies
590. Special Topics in Literature 
590S. Special Topics in Literature
612S. Theories of the Image
620S. Film-philosophers / Film-makers
622. Science Studies
623. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America
625S. Comparative Media Studies
630S. Phenomenology and Media
632S. Whitehead, Bergson, James
640S. Theory and Practice of Literary Translation
644. Modernism 
672. Representation in a Global Perspective 
681S. Wittgensteinian Perspectives on Literary Theory
682. The Intellectual as Writer 
683. Studies in Legal Theory 
690. Special Topics in Literature 
690-1. Special Topics in Literature of the Modern Era 
690-3. Topics in Cultural Studies 
690-6. Topics in Psychoanalytic Criticism 
690-7. Special Topics in Literature and History 
690-8. Special Topics in Literature: Paradigms of Modern Thought
690S. Special Topics in Literature
690S-3. Topics in Cultural Studies 
690S-4. Special Topics in Film
690S-8. Special Topics in Literature: Paradigms of Modern Thought
695S. Literature Seminar

Medium Courses
110. Introduction to Film Studies
111. Introduction to the Arts of the Moving Image
201. Introduction to Global Cultural Studies
208S. The Silent Film: An Introduction
211. Indian Cinema



Global Cultural Studies in Literature Program (LIT) 545

212. World of Korean Cinema
213. Japanese Cinema
214. Modern Chinese Cinema
215. Italian Cinema
216S. Trauma and Nostalgia: East European Film in the 21st Century
217. Contemporary Israeli Cinema
218. Existentialist Cinema 
219. Women in Film 
220. Film Genres 
221. American Film Comedy 
222. Global Performance Art: History/Theory from 1950’s to Present
223. Film Noir
223S. Film Noir
224S. Digital Storytelling
224SA. Digital Storytelling
263S. Screening the Holocaust: Jews, WWII, and World Cinema
279S. Docu-Poetry: Real Life Truths Outside and Inside the Poetic Narrative
286. German History Through Film
290-2. Special Topics in National Cinema
290AS-1. Studies in the United States Culture Industries
290S-2. Special Topics in National Cinema
298S. Revealing Histories: Polish Cinema
301S. Theory Today: Introduction to the Study of Literature
302. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes
302S. Hashtags Memes, Digital Tribes
313. Movies of the World/The World of Movies 
314S. States of Exile and Accented Cinemas
315S. Sexualities in Film and Video (DS4)
316. Film Theory
317. Media Theory
318S. American Independent Cinema
320S. Social Movements and Social Media
335S. Political Economies of the Global Image
339. El cine político en américa Latina
371. Problems in Global Culture
371S. Problems in Global Culture
377. Kafka and Cinema
380. Marxism and Society
390A-12. Special Topics in World Media
390S-4. Special Topics in Film
390S-9. Special Topics in Science and Culture
412S. Cultures of New Media
495. Honors Thesis I
496. Honors Thesis II
510. Citizen Godard
520S. Performance Studies
610S. Basic Concepts in Cinema Studies
611S. Film Feminisms
612S. Theories of the Image
613S. Third Cinema
614S. Thinking Digital Cinema
615S. The #Selfie
620S. Film-philosophers / Film-makers
621S. Critical Studies in New Media
625S. Comparative Media Studies
630S. Phenomenology and Media
631S. Seminar on Modern Chinese Cinema
632. Modern Chinese Cinema
690-4. Special Topics in Film
690S-4. Special Topics in Film

Marine Biology
For courses in marine biology, see Biology on page 209; Environmental Sciences and Policy Program on 

page 356; and the University Program in Marine Sciences on page 549.



 Marine Science and Conservation Leadership546

Marine Science and Conservation Leadership
Professor Silliman, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
This certificate program offers all undergraduates at Duke University the opportunity to supplement their 

majors with studies of leadership in marine science and conservation. The program is designed to expand the 
academic breadth of Duke undergraduates who wish to pursue graduate degrees in biology, environmental science, 
social science, and policy, as well as professional careers in medicine and other disciplines. It seeks to stimulate 
interdisciplinary studies, including the human dimension, using marine systems as a model. It also fosters 
leadership skills in communication, management, values, and ethics. Students apply biological and ecological 
principles to the study of marine organisms and develop and evaluate solutions to conservation challenges. They 
are encouraged to think reflectively about their roles as citizens and leaders and the philosophical, ethical, and 
practical positions they will face in these roles.

The certificate program requires a residential component at Duke’s Marine Laboratory in Beaufort, North 
Carolina, for one full academic semester (fall or spring) or both summer terms.

Course of Study
The Marine Science and Conservation Leadership Program is rooted in marine science and conservation 

but includes studies in a variety of disciplines—biology, earth and ocean sciences, economics, engineering, 
environmental sciences and policy, markets and management studies, philosophy, political science, public policy, 
religion, and theater studies. The introductory course on environmental sciences and policy introduces students 
to the integration of natural and social sciences and a means of evaluating an environmental issue and developing 
an effective solution. A capstone course is required of all students during the spring semester of their senior year.

Certificate Requirements
The certificate requirements are: 1) a total of six courses: one introductory course (Environment 102 or 

Environment 201 with permission, for students who place out of Environment 102), one leadership, ethics, 
management, or communication course, two marine science courses (one natural science and one social science), 
one marine conservation course, and one capstone course taken during spring of the senior year; 2) no more than 
three courses may originate in a single department; and 3) no more than two courses that are counted toward the 
marine science and conservation leadership certificate may also satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, 
or other certificate program. Appropriate courses may come from the list below or may include other courses as 
approved by the director. Acceptance into the certificate program does not guarantee enrollment in electives, with 
the exception of the capstone course.

Program Enrollment
All students are eligible to enroll in the program. Enrollment must be done via the Duke Marine Laboratory 

website at https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs/undergraduate/certificate. 

Courses in Marine Science and Conservation Leadership

Introductory Courses
Environment 
102. Introduction to Environmental Sciences and Policy 
201. Integrating Environmental Sciences and Policy 

Leadership/Ethics/Management/Communication Courses
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
331S. Buddhist Ethics
Biology
255. Philosophy of Biology
Documentary Studies
248S. Environmental Conservation and Documentary Photography
Environment
214S. Ethical Challenges in Environmental Conservation

https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs/undergraduate/certificate


Marine Science and Conservation Leadership 547

216S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
222S. Environmental Conservation and Documentary Photography
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
214S. Ethical Challenges in Environmental Conservation
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
International Comparative Studies
229S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
Markets and Management Studies
210. Managerial Effectiveness
Neuroscience
237. Religion and Science
Philosophy
215. Applied and Environmental Ethics
314. Philosophy of Biology
Political Science
367S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
Public Policy
259S. Women as Leaders
263. Border Crossing: Leadership, Value Conflicts, and Public Life
265S. Enterprising Leadership
271S. Social Entrepreneurship in Action
279S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding
302D. Policy Choice as Value Conflict
Religion
287. Religion and Science
321S. Buddhist Ethics
Science & Society
156. Genetics, Genomics, and Society: Implications for the 21st Century
Study of Ethics
265. Applied and Environmental Ethics
287. Religion and Science
321S. Buddhist Ethics
Theater Studies
248S. The Art of Public Speaking: The Natural Voice

Marine Science: Natural Science Courses
Biology
157. The Dynamic Oceans
175LA. Marine Biology
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems
273LA. Marine Ecology
275A. Biology for Engineers: Informing Engineering Decisions
278LA. Comparative Physiology of Marine Animals
279LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
293. Research Independent Study
293-1. Research Independent Study
293A. Research Independent Study
293A-1. Research Independent Study
335A. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
335LA. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
369LA. Biological Oceanography
373LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates
380LA. Marine Molecular Microbiology
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment
491A. Independent Study: Advanced Topics
493. Research Independent Study
493A. Research Independent Study
Earth and Ocean Sciences
102. The Dynamic Oceans
202. Atmosphere and Ocean Dynamics
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems
273LA. Biological Oceanography
280LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
315. Waves, Beaches, and Coastline Dynamics
364S. Changing Oceans
370A. Physical Oceanography
374LA. Marine Ecology
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates
Electrical and Computer Engineering
384LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics



 Marine Science and Conservation Leadership548

Environment
175LA. Marine Biology
271A. Biology for Engineers: Informing Engineering Decisions
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems
273LA. Marine Ecology
278LA. Comparative Physiology of Marine Animals
280LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
335A. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
335LA. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
362S. Changing Oceans
369LA. Biological Oceanography
370A. Physical Oceanography
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates
383LA. Marine Molecular Microbiology
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment
571A. Sojourn in Singapore: Urban Tropical Ecology
579LA. Biological Oceanography
585. Fisheries Biogeography and Ecology
590LA. Duke-Administered Study Away: Special Topics
Neuroscience
381LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals
Public Policy
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment

Marine Science: Social Science Courses
Cultural Anthropology
419S. Global Environmentalism and the Politics of Nature
Economics
339. Environmental Economics and Policy
530. Resource & Environmental Economics I
530L. Resource and Environmental Economics
Environment
212. United States Environmental Policy
286A. Marine Policy
305SA. Social Impact Analysis
346A. Marine Conservation Policy - A Practicum
363. Environmental Economics and Policy
394A. Research Independent Study
512A. Deep-Sea Science and Environmental Management
520. Resource & Environmental Economics I
520L. Resource and Environmental Economics
528SA. Community-Based Marine Conservation in the Gulf of California
533A. Marine Fisheries Policy
551DA. International Conservation and Development
752. Sustainability and Renewable Resource Economics
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
213. United States Environmental Policy
Public Policy
246A. Marine Conservation Policy - A Practicum
275. United States Environmental Policy
281A. Marine Policy
576. Resource & Environmental Economics I

Marine Conservation Courses
Biology
205. Marine Megafauna
270A. Conservation Biology and Policy
368A. Deep-Sea Science and Environmental Management
375A. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
375LA. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
376A. Marine Mammals
376LA. Marine Mammals
384A. Marine Conservation Biology - a Practicum
571A. Sojourn in Singapore: Urban Tropical Ecology
Environment
205. Marine Megafauna
270A. Conservation Biology and Policy
287A. Marine Conservation Service-Learning Course: Challenges at Sea
307A. Barrier Island Ecology, Geology, and Policy
314. Managing the Oceans to Solve Global Problems



University Program in Marine Sciences 549

375A. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
375LA. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
376A. Marine Mammals
376LA. Marine Mammals
384A. Marine Conservation Biology - a Practicum
504A. Marine Protected Area Monitoring and Management
Public Policy
314. Managing the Oceans to Solve Global Problems

Capstone Course
Environment
350S. Marine Science and Conservation Leadership
Public Policy
280S. Marine Science and Conservation Leadership

University Program in Marine Sciences
Professor Read (Environment), Director and Chair; Lecturer Schultz (Environment), Director of Undergrad-
uate Studies; Professors Campbell (Environment), Rittschof (Environment and Biology), and Van Dover (En-
vironment); Associate Professors Basurto (Environment), Halpin (Environment), Hench (Environment), Hunt 
(Environment), Johnson (Environment), Murray (Environment), Nowacek (Environment and Engineering), 
and Silliman (Environment); Assistant Professor Gill; Professors Emeriti Barber (Environment and Biology), C. 
Bonaventura (Environment and Cell Biology), J. Bonaventura (Environment and Cell Biology), Forward (Envi-
ronment and biology), Orbach (Environment), and Ramus (Environment and Biology); Associate Professor of the 
Practice Johnston; Professor of the Practice Emeritus Kirby Smith (Environment) 

The interdisciplinary Program in Marine Sciences provides students with a unique opportunity to live and 
study at the Duke University Marine Laboratory for a full academic semester (fall or spring) or during two summer 
terms. The program emphasizes small class size, independent study, and integrated classroom, laboratory, and 
field experience. Students have daily access to the surrounding marine environment and to modern scientific 
equipment including a shared-use molecular laboratory and a specialized library. 

The marine lab serves students in the biological and environmental sciences as well as those in social 
science, humanities and a variety of other majors. Residential undergraduate courses are offered year-round (fall, 
spring, and Summer Sessions I and II). Fall and spring courses include Beaufort Signature Courses which offer 
students opportunities for extended travel with Duke faculty to places such as Gulf of California, Panama, Puerto 
Rico, Singapore, and US Virgin Islands. Small class size and an island setting facilitate rewarding student-faculty 
interactions. For additional information, contact the Academic and Enrollment Services Office, Duke University 
Marine Lab, 135 Duke Marine Lab Road, Beaufort, NC 28516; (252) 504-7502; ml_enrollment@nicholas.duke.
edu; or visit the website at https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab. Duke students in good standing and with 
adequate preparation are automatically accepted, but must notify the Academic and Enrollment Services Office 
(ml_enrollment@nicholas.duke.edu) of their intent to attend so their records can be appropriately coded for 
registration. Information on academic programs and financial assistance available at the Duke Marine Lab may 
be found by visiting the website at https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab.

Fall, Spring, or Summer Courses at Beaufort
The courses below are described in the bulletin listings of the specified departments. See also the online 

course catalog or the Duke Marine Lab website (https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab) for the current schedule 
of courses. For information on courses fulfilling requirements for specific majors (including evolutionary 
anthropology, biology, earth and ocean sciences, and environmental sciences and policy), minors (including 
biology, chemistry, and environmental sciences and policy), and programs (including prehealth and Marine 
Science and Conservation Leadership) see the Marine Lab website’s academic programs section (https://
nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs/undergraduate) or consult the director of undergraduate studies for the 
department. 

Courses in the University Program in Marine Sciences
Biology
175LA. Marine Biology
201LA. Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology

mailto:ml_enrollment@nicholas.duke.edu
mailto:ml_enrollment@nicholas.duke.edu
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab
mailto:ml_enrollment@nicholas.duke.edu
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs/undergraduate
https://nicholas.duke.edu/marinelab/programs/undergraduate


 University Program in Marine Sciences550

202LA. Gateway to Biology: Genetics and Evolution
205. Marine Megafauna
270A. Conservation Biology and Policy
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems
273LA. Marine Ecology
275A. Biology for Engineers: Informing Engineering Decisions
278LA. Comparative Physiology of Marine Animals
279LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
293. Research Independent Study
293-1. Research Independent Study
293A. Research Independent Study
293A-1. Research Independent Study
309A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health
319A. Coastal Watershed Science and Policy
335A. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
335LA. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
368A. Deep-Sea Science and Environmental Management
369LA. Biological Oceanography
373LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals
375A. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
375LA. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
376A. Marine Mammals
376LA. Marine Mammals
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates
380LA. Marine Molecular Microbiology
384A. Marine Conservation Biology - a Practicum
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment
493. Research Independent Study
493A. Research Independent Study
570LA-1. Experimental Tropical Marine Ecology
570LA-2. Marine Ecology of the Pacific Coast of California
571A. Sojourn in Singapore: Urban Tropical Ecology
579LA. Biological Oceanography
Cell Biology
493. Research Independent Study
Chemistry
201DLA. Organic Chemistry I at the Duke Marine Lab
202LA. Organic Chemistry II
Earth and Ocean Sciences
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems
273LA. Biological Oceanography
280LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
370A. Physical Oceanography
374LA. Marine Ecology
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates
391. Independent Study
392. Independent Study
393. Research Independent Study
393A. Research Independent Study
394. Research Independent Study
394A. Research Independent Study
579LA. Biological Oceanography
Electrical and Computer Engineering
384LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
Environment
175LA. Marine Biology
205. Marine Megafauna
270A. Conservation Biology and Policy
271A. Biology for Engineers: Informing Engineering Decisions
272A. Analysis of Ocean Ecosystems
273LA. Marine Ecology
275SA. Global Fisheries Conflicts: Exploring Local and Global Economic, Ecological, and Social Impacts
278LA. Comparative Physiology of Marine Animals
280LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics
286A. Marine Policy
287A. Marine Conservation Service-Learning Course: Challenges at Sea
307A. Barrier Island Ecology, Geology, and Policy
309A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health
321A. Coastal Watershed Science and Policy
335A. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation



University Program in Marine Sciences 551

335LA. Drones in Marine Biology, Ecology, and Conservation
346A. Marine Conservation Policy - A Practicum
350S. Marine Science and Conservation Leadership
369LA. Biological Oceanography
370A. Physical Oceanography
373LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals
375A. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
375LA. Biology and Conservation of Sea Turtles
376A. Marine Mammals
376LA. Marine Mammals
377LA. Biodiversity of Marine Invertebrates
383LA. Marine Molecular Microbiology
384A. Marine Conservation Biology - a Practicum
391. Independent Study
391A. Independent Study
393. Research Independent Study
393-1. Research Independent Study
393A. Research Independent Study
394A. Research Independent Study
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment
476A. Data and Time Series Analysis in Marine Sciences
504A. Marine Protected Area Monitoring and Management
528SA. Community-Based Marine Conservation in the Gulf of California
533A. Marine Fisheries Policy
551DA. International Conservation and Development
571A. Sojourn in Singapore: Urban Tropical Ecology
573A. Coastal and Marine Pollution
579LA. Biological Oceanography
585. Fisheries Biogeography and Ecology
590A. Duke-Administered Study Away: Special Topics
590SA. Seminar in Ocean Sciences
Global Health
309A. Oceans in Human and Environmental Health
Neuroscience
381LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals
Physics
141LA. General Physics I
142LA. General Physics II
Public Policy
246A. Marine Conservation Policy - A Practicum
280S. Marine Science and Conservation Leadership
281A. Marine Policy
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment
Statistical Science
101LA. Data Analysis and Statistical Inference

Markets and Management Studies
Martha Reeves, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The Markets and Management Studies Program at Duke is designed to meet the needs of Duke 

undergraduates who wish to study business issues and functions in preparation for careers in business and 
management, banking, consulting, government, the nonprofit sector, and related graduate fields. Courses in 
the program emphasize three integrated themes: (1) globalization and organizational innovations in the world 
economy; (2) the social determinants and consequences of new or changing technologies; and (3) the effect of 
cross-cultural and institutional factors on management and entrepreneurship.

Course of Study
Organizational studies in the social sciences provide an innovative, liberal arts approach to business 

education. The markets and management studies program is rooted in sociology, but it also includes studies in a 
variety of disciplines—economics, history, political science, public policy studies, ethics, and management science. 
Each course in the program deals in some way with the impact of different organizational forms on managing 
human resources, coordinating work, integrating technology, and using business networks in an increasingly 



 Markets and Management Studies (MMS)552

competitive global economy. The four overarching learning objectives of the program are bridging theory and 
research, teamwork, communication skills, and active learning.

Certificate Requirements
The certificate requirements are: 1) a total of seven courses: three core courses, one of which is Markets and 

Management Studies 450, an integrative capstone course taken in the senior year, and four elective courses; 2) no 
more than three courses may originate in a single department (including MMS); and 3) no more than two courses 
that are counted toward the markets and management studies certificate may also satisfy the requirements of any 
major, minor, or other certificate program.

Program Enrollment
Only sophomores and juniors who have officially declared their major may enroll in the program. Enrollment 

must be done via the Markets and Management Studies website at https://www.markets.duke.edu.

Courses in Markets and Management Studies (MMS)

Core Course
450. Markets and Management Capstone. R, SS Capstone course open only to students in the Markets 
and Management Studies Program. Includes review of major perspectives and concepts from the program’s 
core courses, plus a team project involving business plans or alternatively a strategic plan to identify and resolve 
problems confronting actual companies, industries, and communities. Students also develop a case study 
research paper of a product, firm, industry, occupation, country, or region. Consent of Director of Markets and 
Management Studies Program required. Instructor: Green, Grody, Reeves, or Veraldi. One course.

Electives
190FS. Special Topics in Markets and Managements. Topics vary by semester. Open to students in the 
Focus Program only. One course.
195FS. Freedom and the Market. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Sociology 197FS
197. Organizational Leadership & Management. SS Study of individual and group behaviors within 
organized settings and managerial strategies that enhance organizational effectiveness. Topics include 
leadership, culture and diversity, power and politics, communication, decision making, motivation and reward 
systems, conflict management, justice and ethics as well as organization structure and design. Special attention 
to critical assessment of new technological options in organizational settings with an aim to produce informed, 
ethical consumers and leaders. Instructor: Grody, Hicks. One course.
210. Managerial Effectiveness. SS, STS Introduction to study of individual and group behavior within 
organized settings. Emphasis given to managerial strategies that enhance organizational effectiveness. Topics 
include leadership, motivation and reward systems; decision making, power and politics; conflict management, 
globalization, justice and ethics; and organization culture, structure and design. Special attention to critical 
assessment of new technological options in organizational settings with an aim to produce informed, ethical 
consumers and managers. Instructor: Grody, Hicks. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
220. Marketing Management. SS, STS Introduction to current basic principles and concepts in marketing. 
Focus on Internet’s impact on traditional marketing methods. Exposure to marketing concepts in settings such 
as: consumer goods firms, manufacturing and service industries, small and large businesses. Development and 
trends in strategic implications of the Internet for consumer behavior, business opportunities, and marketing 
strategies. Instructor: Grody, Lin. One course.
230. Game Changers: From Panda Diplomacy to Zipcar. The course discovers and draws inspiration 
from different types of game changers in a variety of fields and disciplines—from politics and policy to business/
marketing/finance, environment and social movement. Investigations are pursued on how out-of-box thinking 
has brought creativity to problem solving and changed the ways people live, connect, and contribute around the 
world. The relevant factors that have helped successfully implement the core ideas as well as the blunders that 
pioneers have encountered are examined. Instructor: Pikuei Tu. One course.
272. Marketing Across Borders, Cultures and Demographics. CCI, SS Investigates and discusses 

https://www.markets.duke.edu


Markets and Management Studies (MMS) 553

theories and techniques used to market to the world’s different shoppers and consumers in developing and 
industrialized economies and countries; gives an understanding of how to target market to shoppers and 
consumers by varied insights of each target group; Focuses on “Consumer is Boss” and the understanding of 
how to influence at “First Moment of Truth” and at the “Second Moment of Truth”; will include a team project 
developing collaboration skills and gaining insight into a specific target group and product; local field trips to 
engage consumers in homes and where they shop; guest lecturers from Fortune 500 corporations. Instructor: 
Grody. One course.
275. Business of Sport: A Comprehensive Look at a Powerhouse Global Industry. Provides a broad 
overview of “Sports”, finance/valuation, professional/college, sponsorship/marketing, teams/leagues, labor/
ownership; examines industry from finance perspective in determining valuations; examines role of sports 
and transformation into entertainment; how web based applications have changed the dynamic of the sports 
industry; discussion of topics regarding lockouts, free agency, paying college athletes, NCAA tournament, college 
athletic budgets, Super Bowl, athlete salaries, public/corporate funding. Instructor: Tiryakian. One course.
365. Strategic Financial Management. SS Strategic financial issues confronting the firm. Basic problems 
of strategic direction for the firm with respect to external competitive environment and management of internal 
strategy processes. Tools and ideas to manage formulation and implementation of strategic choices for the firm. 
Study of firm’s strategic position relative to rivals, the larger industry, and the customer. Prerequisite: Markets 
and Management Studies 85 and Economics 271 or Economics 373 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Veraldi. 
One course.
370. Managerial Finance. SS Concepts and processes of corporate finance; functions, technology and 
techniques of financial management. Topics include analysis of financial statements, ratio analysis and 
the statement of cash flows; capital budgeting; risk and return; stocks and bonds; cost of capital; financial 
institutions; securities markets and international finance. Not open to first year students, nor to students who 
have taken Markets and Management Studies 85. Instructor: Tiryakian and Veraldi. One course.
380. Entrepreneurial Marketing. SS Teaches students how to discover and understand customer wants 
and needs, understand the impacts of the market environment on customer behavior and product acceptance, 
define products that will meet customer needs, choose the right distribution channels, price and promote the 
product or service effectively, understand the unique ways in which the marketing process must be tailored to an 
entrepreneurial environment. Instructor: Green. One course.
390. Special Topics in Markets and Management Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Markets and Management 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Markets and Management Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
395. New Ventures 2: Strategy Development. One course. C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 395
396. New Ventures 3: Operating Plan. One course. C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 396
425. Intellectual Property and Innovation: Law, Policy & Entrepreneurship. EI, SS, STS Course 
examines the tightly linked roles of intellectual property law and innovation in the 21st century global economy; 
offers an overview of the use of intellectual property in business, law and public policy, as well as in-depth 
coverage of current controversies impacting the future of the global information economy: gene patents; online 
piracy; music sampling; open source business models; access to medicines; and the impact of the 3D printing 
revolution. Besides overviews of trends in intellectual property law, research and development strategies, 
university technology transfer, and government and private sector investment, examine case studies of specific 
innovators, companies, places. Instructor: Cross. One course. C-L: Sociology 425, Economics 295, Information 
Science + Studies 425, Public Policy 425
490. Special Topics in Markets and Management Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
490S. Special Topics Seminar in Markets and Management Studies. Topics vary each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Markets and Management Studies (MMS)554

Program Courses

Core Courses 
Sociology
223. Data Analytics and Visualization for Business
258. Markets and Marketing
342D. Organizations and Global Competitiveness
344. Technology and Organizational Environments
345. Nations, Regions, and the Global Economy
347. Managing Networks: Research and Applications of Network Analysis to Business Organizations
355. Organizations and Management
359. The Sociology of Entrepreneurship

Elective Courses
Art History
220. Museum Theory and Practice
261. The Contemporary Art Market
508S. Art and Markets
Cultural Anthropology
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
170D. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
210. Global Culture
399. Global Russia
425. Globalization and Anti-Globalization
Dance
279SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene)
307SA. stARTup Project
Economics
119. Introduction to Political Economy
222D. American Business History
274. Advanced Financial and Managerial Accounting
281A. Building and Sustaining a Successful Enterprise
321S. Art and Markets
343. The Contemporary Art Market
355. International Trade
373. Corporate Finance
464. Competitive Strategy and Industrial Organization
French
328SA. Marketing Québec: Policy, Marketing, and Identity
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
241. Gender, Work, and Organizations
361. Money, Sex, Power
History
107D. Introduction to the History of Economic and Business Cultures
252. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
364D. American Business History
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
301S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
361. Money, Sex, Power
Innovation and Entrepreneurship
217SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene)
271A. Building and Sustaining a Successful Enterprise
316SA. stARTup Project
373. Intellectual Property: Law, Policy, and Practice
395. New Ventures 2: Strategy Development
396. New Ventures 3: Operating Plan
International Comparative Studies
307S. Political Economy of Financial Crises
317S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
399. Global Russia
404. Globalization and Anti-Globalization
Music
217SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene)
316SA. stARTup Project
Philosophy
270. Business Ethics: The Debate Over Corporate Social Responsibility
Political Science
145. Introduction to Political Economy
250. The Politics of International Economic Relations: America in the World Economy



Markets and Management Studies (MMS) 555

255. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
315S. Political Economy of Financial Crises
321. International Law and International Institutions
341S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
346. Business, Politics, and Economic Growth
347. Globalization and Domestic Politics
350. International Political Economy
468S. Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Prosperity and Distribution in the Long Run
555S. The Politics of Market Competition in a Global Economy
650S. Political Economy of International Relations
Psychology
425. The Psychology of Consumers
426. Social Psychology of Business
Public Policy
223. Global Russia
240. The Politics of International Economic Relations: America in the World Economy
254. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
288. International Trade
311S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
337SA. Marketing Québec: Policy, Marketing, and Identity
373. Intellectual Property: Law, Policy, and Practice
555S. The Politics of Market Competition in a Global Economy
Russian
399. Global Russia
Sociology
160. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
160D. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
197FS. Freedom and the Market
226. The Challenges of Development
227. Leadership and Collaboration
229. Gender, Work, and Organizations
341. The United States and the Asian Pacific Region
354. Getting Rich: Financial Markets, Household Finance, and Wealth
357. Organizations and Management in Global Capital Markets: an Ethical Perspective
Study of Ethics
255. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-2015
270. Business Ethics: The Debate Over Corporate Social Responsibility
301S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab
555S. The Politics of Market Competition in a Global Economy
Theater Studies
217SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene)
316SA. stARTup Project
Visual and Media Studies
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
221SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene)
247. Global Culture
315SA. stARTup Project
567S. Art and Markets

Mathematics
Professor Mattingly, Chair; Professor Aspinwall, Associate Chair; Professor H. Bray, Director of Undergradu-
ate Studies; Associate Professor of the Practice Schott, Associate Director of Undergraduate Studies; Associate 
Professor of the Practice C. Bray, Supervisor of First-Year Instruction; Professors Aspinwall, H. Bray, Bryant, 
Calderbank, Dasgupta, Daubechies, Durrett, Hain, Harer, Haskins, Kiselev, A. Layton, Liu, Mattingly, Miller, 
Mukherjee, Ng, Nolen, Pardon, Petters, Plesser, Reed, Saper, Schoen, Stern, Venakides, Wickelgren, and Witels-
ki; Associate Professors Getz, Kraines, Lu, Pierce, Rabinoff, Robles, and Wu; Assistant Professors Cheng, Levine, 
and Pollack; Professors Emeriti Allard, Beale, Hodel, Kitchen, Moore, Schaeffer, Smith, Trangenstein, Warner, 
Weisfeld, and Zhou; Associate Professors of the Practice C. Bray and Schott; Assistant Professors of the Practice 
Akin and Viel; Professor of the Practice Emeritus Bookman; Associate Professor of the Practice Emeritus Blake; 
Research Professors Buck and A. Layton; Associate Research Professor Bendich; Assistant Research Professors 
Agazzi, Autry, Campbell, Dym, Gao, Hahn, He, Hebbar, Herschlag, Kovalsky, Lee, Leslie, Li, Lim, Lu, Malen, 
Myer, Nagy, Orizaga, Silliman, Sober, Solomon, Sorribes Rodriguez, Vafee, J. Wang, M. Wang, Watson, Wong, 
Wu, and Zhu; Adjunct Professors Dong, Wahl, and Werner; Lecturers Bar-On and Fitzpatrick

A major and a minor are available in this department. 



 Mathematics (MATH) 556

Courses in Mathematics (MATH) 
21. Introductory Calculus I. Credit awarded on the basis of national/international examinations in 
mathematics such as College Board, International Baccalaureate, British Advanced Level. Equivalent to 
Mathematics 111L as a prerequisite, except that students entering Mathematics 112L in the fall must have taken 
Mathematics 111L or Mathematics 106L at Duke. Instructor: Staff. One course.
22. Introductory Calculus II. Credit awarded on the basis of national/international examinations in 
mathematics such as College Board, International Baccalaureate, British Advanced Level. Equivalent to 
Mathematics 112L as a prerequisite. Instructor: Staff. One course.
75. SPIRE Fellows STEM Skills and Identity Building. Introduction to mathematical techniques and 
applications in science and engineering. Students will participate in group research projects and discussions. 
Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
105L. Laboratory Calculus and Functions I. QS A study of functions with applications, and an 
introduction to differential calculus, with a laboratory component. Topics include a review of algebra and 
functions, mathematical modeling with elementary functions, rates of change, inverse functions, logarithms and 
exponential functions, the derivative, graphical interpretations of the derivative, optimization, related rates. Not 
open to students who have credit for Mathematics 21 or 111L(31L) or 121. Instructor: Staff. One course.
106L. Laboratory Calculus and Functions II. QS A continuation of Mathematics 105L. Topics include 
zeros of functions, antidifferentiation, initial value problems, differential equations, Euler’s method, slope fields, 
review of trigonometry, modeling with trigonometric functions, Riemann sums, the Fundamental Theorem 
of Calculus, integration by substitution, integration by parts, separation of variables, systems of differential 
equations. Students who complete this course can enroll in Mathematics 112L. Not open to students who have 
credit for Mathematics 21 or 111L. Prerequisite: Mathematics 105L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
111L. Laboratory Calculus I. QS Introductory calculus with a laboratory component. Emphasis on 
laboratory projects, group work, and written reports. Differentiation, transcendental functions, optimization, 
differential equations, numerical approximations, Euler’s method, the Fundamental Theorem, separation of 
variables, slope fields, and mathematical modeling. Not open to students who have credit for Mathematics 105L, 
106L, or 121. One course.
112L. Laboratory Calculus II. QS Second semester of introductory calculus with a laboratory component. 
Emphasis on laboratory projects, group work, and written reports. Methods of integration, applications of 
integrals, functions defined by integration, improper integrals, introduction to probability and distributions, 
infinite series, Taylor polynomials, series solutions of differential equations, systems of differential equations, 
Fourier series. Not open to students who have had Mathematics 122 or 122L. Prerequisite: Mathematics 106L or 
111L (AP/IPC/PMC placement credit for Math 21 is not sufficient if Math 122L is offered) or consent. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
121. Introductory Calculus I. QS First topics in introductory calculus including differentiation, 
transcendental functions, optimization, numerical approximations, and the Fundamental Theorem. For transfer 
credit only. Transfer credit not to be granted to students with credit for Math 105L, 106L, or 111L. One course.
122. Introductory Calculus II. QS Transcendental functions, techniques and applications of integration, 
indeterminate forms, improper integrals, infinite series. Not open to students who have had Mathematics 112L 
or 122L. Prerequisite: Mathematics 21. For transfer credit only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
122L. Introductory Calculus II with Applications. QS Topics include sequences and series, the definition 
of the integral and its uses, Taylor and Fourier Series, differential equations and mathematical models. Weekly 
labs will involve explorations of applications, techniques, and Theory. Prerequisite: Advanced placement 
credit for Mathematics 21. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 105L, 106L, 111L, 112L, or 122. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
161FS. Introduction to Mathematical Modeling in Biology. QS, R, STS Introduction to techniques 
used in the construction, analysis, and evaluation of mathematical models. Modeling topics include: How fast 
will an infectious disease spread within a community? What fraction of a population need to be vaccinated in 
order to eradicate a disease, and what is the best vaccination policy? How stable is a given ecosystem? Students 



Mathematics (MATH)  557

will learn how to frame a scientific question in mathematical terms; how to study the model using mathematical 
tools and techniques; how to interpret model predictions in the appropriate scientific context. Department 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
163FS. Mathematics of Data Science. QS, STS Introduction to the mathematics and algorithms that are 
central to a variety of data science applications. Basic mathematical concepts underlying popular data science 
algorithms will be introduced and students will write code implementing these algorithms. We will discuss 
the impact of these algorithms on society and ethical implications. Algorithms examined include: Google’s 
pagerank, principal component analysis for visualizing high dimensional data, hidden Markov models for speech 
recognition, and classifiers detecting spam emails. Linear algebra and basic probability will be the mathematical 
focus and there will be a programming component to this class using the R programming language. Open only 
to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Statistical 
Science 115FS
165FS. Cryptography and Society. QS, STS, W Introduction to topics in mathematical cryptography, and 
the role of cryptography within society, in both historic and modern contexts. Cryptographic systems studied 
will include: early historical ciphers; the Enigma machines of WWII; modern public channel cryptography. 
Students will learn: to encode/decode using each system; to quantify the complexity, strength, and weaknesses 
of each system; to use elementary techniques from combinatorics, graph theory, abstract algebra, and number 
theory; about the role cryptography plays in human society. Open only to students in the Focus Program. 
Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Science & Society 165FS
168S. Mathematical Investigations in Genetics and Genomics. QS Introduction to basic mathematical 
methods in genetics and genomics: Mendelian segregation, population allele frequencies, sex-linked traits, 
genetic recombination, sequence analysis, phylogenetic trees. Necessary background in elementary probability, 
statistics, and matrix algebra will be provided. Prerequisite: Mathematics 21 or 111L or permission of the 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Science & Society
181. Math Everywhere: Mathematical Concepts and Reasoning in our Modern World. 
QS Mathematical concepts and reasoning, and their essential and exciting roles in our modern world. Topics 
include but not limited to: storage and communication of data, images, and music; social networks; evaluation 
of assessments based on statistics; design of visuals for video games and animated movies. Designed for 
students without college math but with interest in mathematical concepts important to modern applications. 
Six largely independent units, focused on building understanding and appreciation rather than development of 
mathematical techniques. Transfer credit not accepted as equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190. Special Topics in Mathematics. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190L. Special Topics in Mathematics. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Seminar on Special Topics in Mathematics. Seminar version of Math 190. Topics vary. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
191. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member. This course does not contribute to the requirements of a mathematics major. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
202. Multivariable Calculus for Economics. QS Gaussian elimination, matrix algebra, determinants, 
linear independence. Calculus of several variables, chain rule, implicit differentiation. Optimization, first order 
conditions, Lagrange multipliers. Integration of functions of several variables. Not open to students who have 
taken Mathematics 212 or 222. Prerequisite: Mathematics 22, 112L, 122, or 122L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
202D. Multivariable Calculus for Economics. QS Gaussian elimination, matrix algebra, determinants, 
linear independence. Calculus of several variables, chain rule, implicit differentiation. Optimization, first order 
conditions, Lagrange multipliers. Integration of functions of several variables. Not open to students who have 
taken Mathematics 212 or 222. Prerequisite: Mathematics 22, 112L, 122, or 122L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
212. Multivariable Calculus. QS Partial differentiation, multiple integrals, and topics in differential and 
integral vector calculus, including Green’s theorem, the divergence theorem, and Stokes’s theorem. Not open to 
students who have taken Mathematics 202 or 222. Prerequisite: Mathematics 22, 112L, 122, or 122L. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.



 Mathematics (MATH) 558

212A. Multivariable Calculus. QS Partial differentiation, multiple integrals, and topics in differential and 
integral vector calculus, including Green’s theorem, the divergence theorem, and Stokes’s theorem. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 202 or 222. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 22, 112L, 122, or 122L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
216. Linear Algebra and Differential Equations. QS Systems of linear equations, matrix operations, 
vector spaces, linear transformations, orthogonality, determinants, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, 
diagonalization, linear differential equations, systems of differential equations with constant coefficients, 
applications, computer simulations. Intended primarily for engineering students. Prospective math majors 
should take Math 221 instead. Prerequisite: Mathematics 202, 212 or 222. Not open to students who have had 
Mathematics 218 or 221 or 356. Instructor: Staff. One course.
218-1. Matrices and Vector Spaces. QS Solving systems of linear equations, matrix factorizations and 
fundamental vector subspaces, orthogonality, least squares problems, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, the 
singular value decomposition and principal component analysis, applications to data-driven problems. Intended 
primarily for students in computer science and other data-focused sciences. Prospective math majors should 
take Mathematics 221 instead. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 216 or 221. Recommended 
prerequisite: Mathematics 21, 121, 106L, or 111L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
218-2. Matrices and Vectors. QS Solving systems of linear equations, matrix factorizations and fundamental 
vector subspaces, orthogonality, least squares problems, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, the singular value 
decomposition and principal component analysis, applications to engineering problems. Intended primarily for 
students in engineering. Prospective math majors should take Mathematics 221 instead. Not open to students 
who have taken Mathematics 216 or 221. Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 21, 121, 106L, or 111L. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
218L. Matrices and Vector Spaces: Optional Lab Section. Optional lab section for Mathematics 218-1: 
solving systems of linear equations, matrix factorizations and fundamental vector subspaces, orthogonality, least 
squares problems, eigenvalues and eigenvectors, the singular value decomposition and principal component 
analysis, applications to data-driven problems. Intended primarily for students in computer science and other 
data-focused sciences. Prospective math majors should take Mathematics 221 instead. Corequisite: Mathematics 
218-1. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
221. Linear Algebra and Applications. QS Systems of linear equations and elementary row operations, 
Euclidean n-space and subspaces, linear transformations and matrix representations, Gram-Schmidt 
orthogonalization process, determinants, eigenvectors and eigenvalues; applications. Introduction to proofs. 
A gateway to more advanced math courses. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 216 or 218. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 122, 112L or 122L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
222. Advanced Multivariable Calculus. QS Partial differentiation, multiple integrals, and topics in 
differential and integral vector calculus, including Green’s theorem, Stokes’s theorem, and Gauss’s theorem for 
students with a background in linear algebra. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 202 or 212. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
228L. Probability for Statistical Inference, Modeling, and Data Analysis. QS One course. C-L: see 
Statistical Science 240L
230. Probability. QS Probability models, random variables with discrete and continuous distributions. 
Independence, joint distributions, conditional distributions. Expectations, functions of random variables, 
central limit theorem. Prerequisite: Calculus II (Mathematics 22, 112L, 122, or 122L) OR credit for multivariable 
calculus (Mathematics 202, 212, or 222) OR graduate student standing. Not open to students who have credit 
for Mathematics 340. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Statistical Science 230, Information Science + Studies
238L. Fundamentals of Data Analysis and Decision Science. QS This course provides a mathematically 
rigorous and broad foundation for key concepts in probability and statistics, as well as the application of 
probability and statistics to the mathematical modeling of non-deterministic systems. The main motivation of 
the course is to show how these concepts are fundamental to a variety of current data analysis techniques, and 
to demonstrate applications of these techniques in situations relevant to all engineering majors. Prerequisite: 
(Mathematics 216, 218, or 221) and (Engineering 103L, Computer Science 101L, or Mathematics 218L). 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



Mathematics (MATH)  559

240. Introduction to Applied Mathematics: Modeling, Equations and Proofs. QS The course 
will consist of 3 or 4 concrete applications, for which precise mathematical questions will be formulated, and 
a mathematical framework developed that will make it possible to answer these questions. In doing so, we 
will encounter and explore portions of real analysis, probability, linear algebra, convex analysis, information 
theory and maybe others. We will also learn how to construct watertight mathematical arguments, and explore 
different proof techniques. Prerequisites: none, beyond high school calculus. Instructor: Staff. One course.
245. Introduction to Mathematics: Example, Conjecture, and Proof. QS Explorations of interesting 
problems from a variety of branches of math such as geometry, number theory, combinatorics, logic, and 
analysis. Students will strengthen their problem solving and proof-writing abilities. Recommended prerequisite: 
Mathematics 216, 218, or 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
260. Python Programming in Mathematics. QS Introductory programming course in Python providing 
a foundational background for programming in a mathematical setting. Students will learn the basics of object 
orientated programming: memory storage and variable scoping, recursion, objects and classes, and basic data 
structures. A variety of numerical methods will be introduced, with a focus on their practical implementation, 
through a series of practice modules covering subjects that may include: linear algebra, machine learning, 
operations research, and genetics. Recommended prerequisite: linear algebra (Mathematics 216, 218, or 
221). No programming background is required. Not open to students who have taken Computer Science 201. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
281S. Problem Solving Seminar. QS Techniques for attacking and solving challenging mathematics 
problems and writing mathematical proofs. Course may be repeated. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
290. Special Topics in Mathematics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
304. Introduction to Cryptography. QS, STS Introduction to techniques in cryptography, accompanied by 
analysis of historical and societal consequences. Topics include elementary combinatorics and number theory, 
including modular arithmetic and prime numbers; classical ciphers and accompanying attacks; the Enigma 
machines; modern encryption schemes, including public channel cryptography. Prerequisite: Mathematics 212, 
216, 221, or 222, or consent of instructor. Not open to students who have taken Mathematics 404. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
305S. Number Theory. QS, R Divisibility properties of integers, prime numbers, congruences, quadratic 
reciprocity, number-theoretic functions, simple continued fractions, rational approximations; contributions 
of Fermat, Euler, and Gauss. Prerequisite: Mathematics 122, 112L, 122L, or consent of instructor. Individual 
research paper required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
323S. Geometry. R Euclidean geometry, inverse and projective geometries, topology (Möbius strips, 
Klein bottle, projective space), and non-Euclidean geometries in two and three dimensions; contributions of 
Euclid, Gauss, Lobachevsky, Bolyai, Riemann, and Hilbert. Research project and paper required. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 122, 112L, 122L, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
333. Complex Analysis. QS Complex numbers, analytic functions, complex integration, Taylor and Laurent 
series, theory of residues, argument and maximum principles, conformal mapping. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
212 or 222 as well as Mathematics 221, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
340. Advanced Introduction to Probability. QS Advanced introduction to basic, non-measure 
theoretic probability covering topics in more depth and with more rigor than MATH 230. Topics include 
random variables with discrete and continuous distributions. Independence, joint distributions, conditional 
distributions, generating functions, Bayes’ formula, and Markov chains. Rigorous arguments are presented for 
the law of large numbers, central limit theorem, and Poisson limit theorems. Prerequisite: Mathematics 202, 
212, or 222. Not open to those who have taken Mathematics 230 or Statistics 230. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Statistical Science 231
342D. Statistics. QS One course. C-L: see Statistical Science 250D; also C-L: Information Science + Studies
343. Theory and Methods of Statistical Learning and Inference. QS One course. C-L: see Statistical 
Science 432
353. Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations. QS First and second order ordinary differential 



 Mathematics (MATH) 560

equations with applications, Laplace transforms, series solutions and qualitative behavior, Fourier series, partial 
differential equations, boundary value problems, Sturm-Liouville theory. Intended primarily for engineering 
and science students. Prerequisite: Mathematics 216. Not open to students who have had Mathematics 356. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
353A. Ordinary and Partial Differential Equations. QS First and second order ordinary differential 
equations with applications, Laplace transforms, series solutions and qualitative behavior, Fourier series, partial 
differential equations, boundary value problems, Sturm-Liouville theory. Intended primarily for engineering 
and science students. Study-abroad version of Math 353. Prerequisite: Mathematics 216. Not open to students 
who have had Mathematics 356. Instructor: Staff. One course.
356. Elementary Differential Equations. QS First and second order differential equations with 
applications; linear systems of differential equations; Fourier series and applications to partial differential 
equations. Additional topics may include stability, nonlinear systems, bifurcations, or numerical methods. Not 
open to students who have had Mathematics 216 or Mathematics 353. Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 
218 or 221 and one of 202, 212, or 222. Instructor: Staff. One course.
361S. Mathematical Numerical Analysis. QS, R Development of numerical techniques for accurate, 
efficient solution of problems in science, engineering, and mathematics through the use of computers. Linear 
systems, nonlinear equations, optimization, numerical integration, differential equations, simulation of 
dynamical systems, error analysis. Research project and paper required. Not open to students who have had 
Computer Science 220 or 520. Prerequisites: Mathematics 212 and 221 and basic knowledge of a programming 
language (at the level of Computer Science 101), or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Modeling Biological Systems
371. Combinatorics. QS Permutations and combinations, generating functions, recurrence relations; topics 
in enumeration theory, including the Principle of Inclusion-Exclusion and Polya Theory; topics in graph theory, 
including trees, circuits, and matrix representations; applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 122, 112L, 122L or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
375. Introduction to Linear Programming and Game Theory. QS Fundamental properties of linear 
programs; linear inequalities and convex sets; primal simplex method, duality; integer programming; two-
person and matrix games. Prerequisite: Mathematics 221 or equivalence. Instructor: Staff. One course.
388. Logic and Its Applications. Topics in proof theory, model theory, and recursion theory; applications to 
computer science, formal linguistics, mathematics, and philosophy. Usually taught jointly by faculty members 
from the departments of computer science, mathematics, and philosophy. Prerequisite: a course in logic or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Computer Science 288, Philosophy 350
390. Special Topics in Mathematics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of 
a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of 
a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 391. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in mathematics or the applications of 
mathematics under the supervision of a faculty member. The goal must be a substantive paper containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Prerequisite: Mathematics 393. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. One course.
401. Introduction to Abstract Algebra. Groups, rings, and fields. Students intending to take a year of 



Mathematics (MATH)  561

abstract algebra should take Mathematics 501 and 502. Not open to students who have had Mathematics 501. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
403. Advanced Linear Algebra. QS Topics in linear algebra beyond those in a first course. For example: 
principal component analysis and other decompositions (singular value, Cholesky, etc.); Perron-Frobenius 
theory; positive semi-definite matrices; linear programming and more general convexity and optimization; basic 
simplicial topology; Gerschgorin theory; classical matrix groups. Applications to computer science, statistics, 
image processing, economics, or other fields of mathematics and science. Prerequisite: Mathematics 212 or 222 
and Mathematics 218 or 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
404. Mathematical Cryptography. QS Mathematics of cryptography and some applications. Topics include 
finite fields, discrete logarithms, integer factorization and RSA, elliptic curve cryptography, hash functions, 
digital signatures, DES and AES. Open to students who have taken Mathematics 304. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
221 or 218 or 216, Computer Science 101L or equivalent. Mathematics 401 or 501 would be useful. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
411. Topology. QS Elementary topology, surfaces, covering spaces, Euler characteristic, fundamental group, 
homology theory, exact sequences. Prerequisite: Mathematics 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
412. Topological Data Analysis. QS Introduction to topology from a computational view-point, with a focus 
on applications. Themes include: basic notions of point-set topology, persistent homology, finding multi-scale 
topological structure in point cloud data. Algorithmic considerations emphasized. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
221 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Computer Science 434
421. Differential Geometry. QS Geometry of curves and surfaces, the Serret-Frenet frame of a space curve, 
Gauss curvature, Cadazzi-Mainardi equations, the Gauss-Bonnet formula. Prerequisite: Mathematics 221 and 
one of 202, 212, or 222. Instructor: Staff. One course.
431. Introduction to Real Analysis. QS, W Algebraic and topological structure of the real number system; 
rigorous development of one-variable calculus including continuous, differentiable, and Riemann integrable 
functions and the Fundamental Theorem of Calculus; uniform convergence of a sequence of functions; 
contributions of Newton, Leibniz, Cauchy, Riemann, and Weierstrass. Students intending to continue studying 
mathematics at a graduate level are encouraged to take Math 531 instead of this class. Not open to students who 
have taken Mathematics 531. Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 202, 212, or 222. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
451S. Nonlinear Ordinary Differential Equations. QS, R Theory and applications of systems of 
nonlinear ordinary differential equations. Topics may include qualitative behavior, numerical experiments, 
oscillations, bifurcations, deterministic chaos, fractal dimension of attracting sets, delay differential equations, 
and applications to the biological and physical sciences. Research project and paper required. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 216 or 356 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
453. Introduction to Partial Differential Equations. QS Heat, wave, and potential equations: scientific 
context, derivation, techniques of solution, and qualitative properties. Topics to include Fourier series and 
transforms, eigenvalue problems, maximum principles, Green’s functions, and characteristics. Intended 
primarily for mathematics majors and those with similar backgrounds. Prerequisite: Mathematics 353 or 356 or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
465. Introduction to High Dimensional Data Analysis. QS Geometry of high dimensional data sets. 
Linear dimension reduction, principal component analysis, kernel methods. Nonlinear dimension reduction, 
manifold models. Graphs. Random walks on graphs, diffusions, page rank. Clustering, classification and 
regression in high-dimensions. Sparsity. Computational aspects, randomized algorithms. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 218 or 221. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Computer Science 445, Statistical Science 465
466. Mathematics of Machine Learning. QS The course will explore mathematics underlying the practice 
and theory of various machine learning concepts and algorithms. Kernel methods, deep learning, reinforcement 
learning, generalization error, stochastic gradient descent, and dimension reduction or data embeddings will be 
introduced. The interplay between the mathematics and real applications will be an component of the course. 
Students can take both this course and Mathematics 465 for credit. Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 
230/340 and 218/216/221 and some familiarity with programing, preferably Python. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.



 Mathematics (MATH) 562

477S. Seminar in Mathematical Modeling with a Focus on Writing. QS, R, W Introduction to 
techniques used in the construction, analysis, and evaluation of mathematical models. Individual modeling 
projects in biology, chemistry, economics, engineering, medicine, or physics. Considerable attention is given 
to writing in an interdisciplinary context. Not open to student that have taken Math 476S. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 353 or 356 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Topics in Mathematics. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Seminar in Mathematics. Intended primarily for juniors and seniors majoring in mathematics. 
Required research project culminating in written report. Prerequisite: Mathematics 212 and 221. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Same as Mathematics 391, but for seniors. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
492. Independent Study. Directed reading in a field of mathematics or its applications under the supervision 
of a faculty member resulting in a substantive paper containing significant analysis and interpretation of a 
previously approved topic. For seniors. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 491. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Same as Mathematics 393, but for seniors. Consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in mathematics or the applications of 
mathematics under the supervision of a faculty member. The goal must be a substantive paper containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. For seniors. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
493. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
501. Introduction to Algebraic Structures I. Groups: symmetry, normal subgroups, quotient groups, 
group actions. Rings: homomorphisms, ideals, principal ideal domains, the Euclidean algorithm, unique 
factorization. Not open to students who have had Mathematics 401. Prerequisite: Mathematics 221 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
502. Introduction to Algebraic Structures II. Fields and field extensions, modules over rings, further 
topics in groups, rings, fields, and their applications. Prerequisite: Mathematics 501, or 401 and consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
527. General Relativity. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Physics 622
531. Real Analysis I. QS, W Topology of Rn, continuous functions, uniform convergence, compactness, 
infinite series, theory of differentiation, and integration. Not open to students who have had Mathematics 431. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
532. Basic Analysis II. QS Differential and integral calculus in Rn. Inverse and implicit function theorems. 
Further topics in multivariable analysis. Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 221, Mathematics 531, or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
541. Applied Stochastic Processes. QS An introduction to stochastic processes without measure theory. 
Topics selected from: Markov chains in discrete and continuous time, queuing theory, branching processes, 
martingales, Brownian motion, stochastic calculus. Prerequisite: Mathematics 230 or Mathematics 340 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Statistical Science 621
545. Introduction to Stochastic Calculus. QS Introduction to the theory of stochastic differential 
equations oriented towards topics useful in applications. Brownian motion, stochastic integrals, and diffusions 
as solutions of stochastic differential equations. Functionals of diffusions and their connection with partial 
differential equations. Ito’s formula, Girsanov’s theorem, Feynman-Kac formula, Martingale representation 
theorem. Additional topics have included one dimensional boundary behavior, stochastic averaging, stochastic 
numerical methods. Prerequisites: Undergraduate background in real analysis (Mathematics 431) and 
probability (Mathematics 230 or 340). Instructor: Staff. One course.
551. Applied Partial Differential Equations and Complex Variables. QS Initial and boundary 
value problems for the heat and wave equations in one and several dimensions. Fourier series and integrals, 
eigenvalue problems. Laplace transforms, solutions via contour integration, and elementary complex variables. 



Mathematics (MATH)  563

Solutions via Green’s functions. Intended for applied math students and students in science and engineering. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 216 and 353 or the equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
553. Asymptotic and Perturbation Methods. QS Asymptotic solution of linear and nonlinear ordinary and 
partial differential equations. Asymptotic evaluation of integrals. Singular perturbation. Boundary layer theory. 
Multiple scale analysis. Prerequisite: Mathematics 353 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
555. Ordinary Differential Equations. QS Existence and uniqueness theorems for nonlinear systems, well-
posedness, two-point boundary value problems, phase plane diagrams, stability, dynamical systems, and strange 
attractors. Prerequisite: Mathematics 221, 216 or 356, and 531 or 431. Instructor: Staff. One course.
557. Introduction to Partial Differential Equations. QS Fundamental solutions of linear partial 
differential equations, hyperbolic equations, characteristics, Cauchy-Kowalevski theorem, propagation of 
singularities. Prerequisite: Mathematics 532 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
560. Theory and Practice of Algorithms. The mathematical theory of algorithms and graphs and their 
practical implementations. Examines the foundational mathematical structures for the behavior and analysis 
of algorithms from a variety of domains, with a particular emphasis on graphs. Students tie theory to practice 
by writing code to implement algorithms, and compare experimentally observed run-times to those predicted 
by the mathematical theory. Recommended prerequisite: Computer Science 201; or recommended corequisite: 
ECE 551; or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
561. Numerical Linear Algebra, Optimization and Monte Carlo Simulation. QS Structured 
scientific programming in C/C++ and FORTRAN. Floating point arithmetic and interactive graphics for 
data visualization. Numerical linear algebra, direct and iterative methods for solving linear systems, matrix 
factorizations, least squares problems and eigenvalue problems. Iterative methods for nonlinear equations and 
nonlinear systems, Newton’s method. Prerequisite: Mathematics 212 and 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
563. Applied Computational Analysis. QS Approximation theory: Fourier series, orthogonal polynomials, 
interpolating polynomials and splines. Numerical differentiation and integration. Numerical methods for 
ordinary differential equations: finite difference methods for initial and boundary value problems, and stability 
analysis. Introduction to finite element methods. Prerequisite: Mathematics 561 and familiarity with ODEs at 
the level of Mathematics 216 or 356. Instructor: Staff. One course.
565. Numerical Analysis. QS, R One course. C-L: see Computer Science 520; also C-L: Statistical Science 
612
573S. Modeling of Biological Systems. QS, R Research seminar on mathematical methods for modeling 
biological systems. Exact content based on research interests of students. Review methods of differential 
equations and probability. Discuss use of mathematical techniques in development of models in biology. Student 
presentations and class discussions on individual research projects. Presentation of a substantial individual 
modeling project to be agreed upon during the first weeks of the course. Not open to students who have had 
Modeling Biological Systems 495S. Prerequisites: Mathematics 216 or 356 or consent of instructor. One course. 
C-L: Modeling Biological Systems 573S, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 573S
575. Mathematical Fluid Dynamics. QS Properties and solutions of the Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, 
including particle trajectories, vorticity, conserved quantities, shear, deformation and rotation in two and 
three dimensions, the Biot-Savart law, and singular integrals. Additional topics determined by the instructor. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 453 or 551 or an equivalent course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
577. Mathematical Modeling. QS Formulation and analysis of mathematical models describing problems 
from science and engineering including areas like biological systems, chemical reactions, and mechanical 
systems. Mathematical techniques such as nondimensionalization, perturbation analysis, and special solutions 
will be introduced to simplify the models and yield insight into the underlying problems.Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
581. Mathematical Finance. QS An introduction to the basic concepts of mathematical finance. Topics 
include modeling security price behavior, Brownian and geometric Brownian motion, mean variance analysis 
and the efficient frontier, expected utility maximization, Ito’s formula and stochastic differential equations, the 
Black-Scholes equation and option pricing formula. Prerequisites: Mathematics 212 (or 222), 221, and 230 (or 
340), or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 673



 Mathematics (MATH) 564

582. Financial Derivatives. A rigorous introduction to financial derivatives with applications. Topics 
include: binomial trees and geometric Brownian motion; European options, American options, forwards, 
and futures; put-call parity; the Black-Scholes-Merton pricing formula and its derivations; Delta and Gamma 
hedging; implied volatility; Merton jump-diffusion model; Heston model; GARCH(1,1) model. Prerequisites: 
Math 212 (or 222) and Math 230 (or 340) or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 
674
590-01. Special Readings. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-02. Advanced Special Topics in Mathematics. Topics in mathematics suitable for advanced 
undergraduates or graduate students. Topics vary per semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-60. Topics in Theory and Practice of Algorithms. The mathematical theory of algorithms and 
graphs and their practical implementations. Examines the foundational mathematical structures for the 
behavior and analysis of algorithms from a variety of domains, with a particular emphasis on graphs. Students 
tie theory to practice by writing code to implement algorithms, and compare experimentally observed run-times 
to those predicted by the mathematical theory. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201 or corequisite of ECE 551 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
601. Groups, Rings, and Fields. Groups including nilpotent and solvable groups, p-groups and Sylow 
theorems; rings and modules including classification of modules over a PID and applications to linear algebra; 
fields including extensions and Galois theory. Prerequisite: Mathematics 502 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
602. An Introduction to Commutative Algebra and Algebraic Geometry. Affine algebraic varieties, 
Groebner bases, localization, chain conditions, dimension theory, singularities, completions. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 601 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
603. Representation Theory. QS Representation theory of finite groups, Lie algebras and Lie groups, roots, 
weights, Dynkin diagrams, classification of semisimple Lie algebras and their representations, exceptional 
groups, examples and applications to geometry and mathematical physics. Prerequisite: Mathematics 501 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Physics 603
605. Algebraic Number Theory. Binary quadratic forms; orders, integral closure; Dedekind domains; 
fractional ideals; spectra of rings; Minkowski theory; fundamental finiteness theorems; valuations; ramification; 
zeta functions; density of primes in arithmetic progressions. Prerequisites: Mathematics 502 or 601 or consent 
of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
607. Computation in Algebra and Geometry. QS Application of computing to problems in areas of 
algebra and geometry, such as linear algebra, algebraic geometry, differential geometry, representation theory, 
and number theory, use of general purpose symbolic computation packages such as Maple or Mathematica; use 
of special purpose packages such as Macaulay, PARI-GP, and LiE; programming in C/C++. Previous experience 
with programming or the various mathematical topics not required. Corequisite: Mathematics 601 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
611. Algebraic Topology I. QS Fundamental group and covering spaces, singular and cellular homology, 
Eilenberg-Steenrod axioms of homology, Euler characteristic, classification of surfaces, singular and cellular 
cohomology. Prerequisite: Mathematics 411 and 501 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
612. Algebraic Topology II. QS Universal coefficient theorems, Künneth theorem, cup and cap products, 
Poincaré duality, plus topics selected from: higher homotopy groups, obstruction theory, Hurewicz and 
Whitehead theorems, and characteristic classes. Prerequisite: Mathematics 611 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
619. Computational Topology. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 636
620. Smooth Manifolds. QS This introductory course will cover smooth manifolds, orientation, immersions, 
submersions, Stokes Theorem, Frobenius Theorem, Lie groups, vector bundles, Lie groups, and additional 
topics (such as principal bundles) as time allows. Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 532 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
621. Differential Geometry. QS Differentiable manifolds, fiber bundles, connections, curvature, 
characteristic classes, Riemannian geometry including submanifolds and variations of length integral, complex 



Mathematics (MATH)  565

manifolds, homogeneous spaces. Prerequisite: Mathematics 532 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
625. Riemann Surfaces. Compact Riemann Surfaces, maps to projective space, Riemann-Roch Theorem, 
Serre duality, Hurwitz formula, Hodge theory in dimension one, Jacobians, the Abel-Jacobi map, sheaves, Cech 
cohomology. Prerequisite: Mathematics 633 and Mathematics 611 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
627. Algebraic Geometry. Projective varieties, morphisms, rational maps, sheaves, divisors, sheaf 
cohomology, resolution of singularities. Prerequisite: Mathematics 602 and 625; or consent of instructor 
advised. Instructor: Staff. One course.
631. Measure and Integration. QS Lebesgue measure and integration; Lp spaces; absolute continuity; 
abstract measure theory; Radon-Nikodym Theorem; connection with probability; Fourier series and integrals. 
Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 531 and 532 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
633. Complex Analysis. QS Complex calculus, conformal mapping, Riemann mapping theorem, Riemann 
surfaces. Prerequisite: Mathematics 532 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
635. Functional Analysis. QS Metric spaces, fixed point theorems, Baire category theorem, Banach spaces, 
fundamental theorems of functional analysis, Fourier transform. Prerequisite: Mathematics 631 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
636. Analytic Number Theory. QS Dirichlet series, the Riemann zeta function and L-functions, solutions 
to Diophantine equations, the circle method, exponential sums and character sums. Additional topics may 
include prime number theorems, sieve methods, connections to harmonic analysis, and automorphic forms. 
Prerequisite: 333, 531 and 502 or equivalent, or permission of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
641. Probability. QS Designed to be a sequel to Statistical Science 711. The basic five topics are: martingales, 
Markov chains from an advanced viewpoint, ergodic theory, Brownian motion and its applications to random 
walks, Donsker’s theorem and the law of the iterated logarithm, and multidimensional Brownian motion, 
connection to PDE’s. For those who have not had 711, we will prove the law of large numbers using martingales 
and obtain versions of the central limit theorem from Donsker’s theorem. Course requires a knowledge of 
meaure theory. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 711 or Mathematics 631. Instructor: Staff. One course.
651. Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations. QS Linear wave motion, dispersion, stationary phase, 
foundations of continuum mechanics, characteristics, linear hyperbolic systems, and nonlinear conservation 
laws. Prerequisite: Mathematics 557 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
653. Elliptic Partial Differential Equations. QS Fourier transforms, distributions, elliptic equations, 
singular integrals, layer potentials, Sobolev spaces, regularity of elliptic boundary value problems. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 557 and 631 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
660. Numerical Partial Differential Equations. QS Introduction to important classes of numerical 
methods for partial differential equations, notably finite difference and finite element methods. Emphasis on 
a solid understanding of the accuracy of these methods, with a view toward the interplay between theory and 
practice. Topics may include finite difference and finite element methods for elliptic equations; finite difference 
methods for parabolic equations; and numerical methods for hyperbolic equations and conservation laws. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 561, 563, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
661. Numerical Solution of Hyperbolic Partial Differential Equations. QS Numerical solution 
of hyperbolic conservation laws. Conservative difference schemes, modified equation analysis and Fourier 
analysis, Lax-Wendroff process. Gas dynamics and Riemann problems. Upwind schemes for hyperbolic systems. 
Nonlinear stability, monotonicity and entropy; TVD, MUSCL, and ENO schemes for scalar laws. Approximate 
Riemann solvers and schemes for hyperbolic systems. Multidimensional schemes. Adaptive mesh refinement. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 561, 563, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
663. Numerical Solution of Elliptic and Parabolic Partial Differential Equations. QS Numerical 
solution of parabolic and elliptic equations. Diffusion equations and stiffness, finite difference methods and 
operator splitting (ADI). Convection-diffusion equations. Finite element methods for elliptic equations. 
Conforming elements, nodal basis functions, finite element matrix assembly and numerical quadrature. Iterative 
linear algebra; conjugate gradients, Gauss-Seidel, incomplete factorizations and multigrid. Mixed and hybrid 
methods. Mortar elements. Reaction-diffusion problems, localized phenomena, and adaptive mesh refinement. 



 Mathematics (MATH) 566

Prerequisite: Mathematics 561, 563, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-00. Topics in Algebraic Geometry. Schemes, intersection theory, deformation theory, moduli, 
classification of varieties, variation of Hodge structure, Calabi-Yau manifolds, or arithmetic algebraic geometry. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 627 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-05. Topics in Number Theory. A selection of topics from algebraic number theory, arithmetic 
geometry, automorphic forms, analytic number theory, etc. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-10. Topics in Topology. Algebraic, geometric, or differential topology. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-20. Topics in Differential Geometry. Lie groups and related topics, Hodge theory, index theory, 
minimal surfaces, Yang-Mills fields, exterior differential systems, harmonic maps, symplectic geometry. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 621 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-30. Topics in Complex Analysis. Geometric function theory, function algebras, several complex 
variables, uniformization, or analytic number theory. Prerequisite: Mathematics 633 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
690-32. Topics in Analysis. Topics in analysis geared towards topics of current research interest. The 
prerequisites will depend on the specific topic covered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-40. Topics in Probability Theory. Probability tools and theory, geared towards topics of current 
research interest. Possible additional prerequisites based on course content in a particular semester. 
Prerequisites: Mathematics 230 or 340 or equivalent, and consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Statistical Science 690-40
690-50. Topics in Partial Differential Equations. Hyperbolic conservation laws, pseudo-differential 
operators, variational inequalities, theoretical continuum mechanics. Prerequisite: Mathematics 651 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-70. Topics in Applied Mathematics. An advanced course in areas of applied mathematics. Topics vary 
by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-82. Topics in Mathematical Finance. Topics of current research interest in mathematical models with 
relevant applications to finance. Prerequisites: Mathematics 230 or 340 or equivalent, or consent of instructor. 
Possible additional prerequisites depending on course content. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 
690-82

The Major
The Department of Mathematics offers both the AB degree and the BS degree. Students who plan to attend 

graduate school in mathematics or the sciences should consider working toward the BS degree, which requires at 
least eight courses in mathematics numbered Mathematics 230 or above. The AB degree requires at least seven 
courses in mathematics numbered Mathematics 230 or above. At least half of the major/minor courses numbered 
above 212 should be taken at Duke. In particular, Mathematics 401 (or 501) and 431 (or 531) should be taken at 
Duke. The specific requirements for each degree are listed below.

The director of undergraduate studies can be consulted for additional information and advice on course 
selection. The Handbook for Mathematics Majors and Minors, published by the department, can be used as a 
guide in developing a coherent program of study consistent with professional goals. 

For the AB Degree
Prerequisites. Mathematics 21 or 111L or 121 or an equivalent course; Mathematics 22 or 112L or 122 or 

122L or an equivalent course; Mathematics 212 or 222 and Mathematics 221 or equivalent courses. (Many upper-
level mathematics courses assume programming experience at the level of Computer Science 94. Students without 
computer experience are encouraged to take Computer Science 101.)

Major Requirements. Seven courses in mathematics numbered 230 or above including Mathematics 401 
or 501 and Mathematics 431 or 531. 



Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN) 567

For the BS Degree
Prerequisites. Mathematics 21 or 111L or 121 or an equivalent course; Mathematics 22 or 112L or 122 or 

122L or an equivalent course; Mathematics 212 or 222 and Mathematics 221 or equivalent courses. (Many upper-
level mathematics courses assume programming experience at the level of Computer Science 94. Students without 
computer experience are encouraged to take Computer Science 101.)

Major Requirements. Eight courses in mathematics numbered 230 or above including Mathematics 401 
or 501; Mathematics 431 or 531; and one of Mathematics 333, 342, 411, 412, 421, 502, 532, 541, 581. No more than 
three electives at the 200-level may count toward the major.  The BS degree also requires a pair of science courses 
from the following list:

• Physics: (Physics 25 (AP), 141L, 151L, or 161D) and (Physics 26 (AP), 142L, 152L, or 162D)
• Statistical Science: Statistical Science 360 and (Statistical Science 444 or 325)
• Economics: Economics 205D and Economics 210D
• Electrical and Computer Engineering: ECE 110L and ECE 280L
• Computer Science: Computer Science 330 and Computer Science 334
• Biology: (Biology 201L and Biology 202L) or (Biology 203L and another higher numbered full-credit 

Biology course)
• Chemistry: (Chemistry 21 (AP), 101DL, or 110DL) and Chemistry 201DL

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers a program for Graduation with Distinction in mathematics. See the Handbook for 

Mathematics Majors and Minors and also the section on honors in this bulletin. 

The Minor
Prerequisites. Mathematics 212 or 222 or the equivalent
Requirements. Five courses in mathematics numbered above 212, other than 222, to include at least one 

course (or its equivalent) from the following: Mathematics 230, 333, 361S, 401, 411, 412, 421, 431, 451S, 487, or 
any Mathematics course at the 500 or 600 level.

Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science
For courses in mechanical engineering, see page 857.

Medieval and Renaissance Studies
Professor Aers, Director; Dr. Cornett, Associate Director and Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors 
Aers, Beckwith, Brothers, Freeman, Gaspar, Janiak, Longino, Martin, Mignolo, Porter, Robisheaux, Sigal, Sol-
terer, Stern, Tennenhouse, Wharton, and Van Miegroet; Associate Professors Eisner, Galletti, Hassan, Malegam, 
McLarney, Neuschel, Norberg, Pak, Smith, Vilches, and Woods; Assistant Professors Caviglia, Giles, Riedel, and 
Werlin; Professors Emeriti Bruzelius, Clark, DeNeef, Finucci, Garci-Gómez, Grant, Greer, Hillerbrand, Mauskopf, 
Newton, Quilligan, Shatzmiller, Silbiger, Silverblatt, and Williams; Lecturing Fellows Dubois, Giugni, and Huff-
man; Instructor Triplett

A major and a minor are available in this program.
The Program in Medieval and Renaissance Studies is designed to provide the student with a wellrounded 

understanding of the historical, cultural, and social forces that shaped the medieval and Renaissance periods. The 
program is divided into four areas of study: fine arts (art and music); history; language and literature (English, 
French, German, Greek, Italian, Latin, and Spanish); and philosophy and religion. See the section on the major 
below. 

Courses in Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN)

Core Courses
190FS. Special Topics in Focus. Special topics in Medieval and Renaissance Studies open only to students 
in the Focus Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN)568

291. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, under 
the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Usually undertaken by a student working on an 
Honors project in consultation with the student’s project advisor. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study: Thesis. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a 
previously approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic and/or artistic 
product that will contribute to developing an honors thesis. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study: Thesis. R Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, 
under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Undertaken by a student working on an 
Honors project in consultation with the student’s project advisor. One course.

Other Courses
For full descriptions of most of these courses, consult the cross-listings under the specified department in this 
bulletin. 
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
105. Old Worlds/New Histories, 500-1500 CE. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 105; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 134
125. Early Modern Europe. CCI, CZ, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 117
128. War and Society in the Middle Ages and Renaissance. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
128
135. Silk Roads and China, Ancient and Medieval Transformations. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
History 135; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 207, Religion 181
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Medieval Renaissance Studies. Topics differ each semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
201S. Music History I: Antiquity Through Renaissance. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Music 
255S
215. Gothic Cathedrals. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Art History 225
217. The Body in Art in Early Modern Europe: Power and Limits of Corporeal Representations. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 317; also C-L: Romance Studies 317, Dance 317, Theater Studies 
245
225. Art in Renaissance Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 255; also C-L: Italian 386
225FS. Art in Renaissance Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 255FS; also C-L: Italian 
386FS
226. Medieval Castles of Europe. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Art History 227
227. Renaissance Architecture in Italy: Brunelleschi to Michelangelo. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Art History 258; also C-L: Italian 258
229A. Renaissance and Baroque Art History. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 255A
233. Michelangelo in Context. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 259; also C-L: Italian 261
240. Drawing Foundations in Early Modern Europe. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media 
Studies 256



Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN) 569

242A. History of Netherlandish Art in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual 
and Media Studies 262A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
243A. History of Netherlandish Art in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual 
and Media Studies 263A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
244. Renaissance Architecture: A European Perspective. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 
254
245. Art & Architecture in Early Modern France. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 268; 
also C-L: French 268
246. Italian Baroque Art. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 256; also C-L: Italian 256, 
Romance Studies 256
248S. Women and Power in the Renaissance. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 258S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 258S, Romance Studies 258S
254. The Expansion of Medieval Europe. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 254
255. The Caribbean, 1492-1700. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 318; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 218
259. Europe Before The Crusades. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 245
268. Islamic Civilization I. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 375; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
256, History 210, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 122, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies, Islamic 
Studies
269. Islamic Civilization II. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 376; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
257, History 211, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 185, International Comparative Studies, Ethics Elective, 
Islamic Studies
272. British Isles in the Middle Ages. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 247
275. Tudor/Stuart Britain. CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see History 269
281. Religion, Reform, and Violence in Early Modern Europe. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
257; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
287. Magic, Religion, and Science since 1400. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 260; also 
C-L: Science & Society 260
287D. Magic, Religion, and Science since 1400. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 260D
289. Rise of Modern Science: Early Science through Newton. CZ, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
History 302
290-1. Topics in Medieval Art and Architecture. One course. C-L: see Art History 290-1
290AS-1. Topics in Renaissance British Literature. Two courses. C-L: see English 290AS-1
290S-1. Special Topics in Medieval and Early Modern Literature. One course. C-L: see English 290S-1
303. Ancient and Medieval Epic. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 204
304. The Problem of Love in Western Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 225; 
also C-L: Literature 205
305S. The Viking Age. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see German 261S; also C-L: History 256S
312. Introduction to Italian Literature I. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Italian 332
314. Introduction to Spanish Literature I. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 332
320S. Chaucer I. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 332S
321. Chaucer II. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 333
330. Shakespeare. ALP, EI, W One course. C-L: see English 235; also C-L: Theater Studies 222
331. Shakespeare through 1600. ALP, EI, R One course. C-L: see English 336; also C-L: Theater Studies 
336



 Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN)570

332. Shakespeare After 1600. ALP, EI, R One course. C-L: see English 337; also C-L: Theater Studies 337
334S. Late Medieval Literature and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see English 331S
337S. Milton. ALP, EI, R One course. C-L: see English 338S
342A. Dante and the Art of Hell. ALP, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 342A; also C-L: Art History 
342A, Literature 342A
343. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 383; also C-L: History 237, 
Cultural Anthropology 383
343A. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 383A; also C-L: History 
237A, Cultural Anthropology 383A
345. The Devil’s Pact: Faust and the Faust Tradition. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see German 370; 
also C-L: Literature 240
346. The History of the Book. ALP, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 360; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies 360, History 367
347. Idealistic Nature: The Literature, Philosophy, and Cognition of Ecology. ALP, CZ, EI One 
course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 307; also C-L: English 355, Visual and Media Studies 347
348S. Medieval Latin. ALP, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Latin 376S
352S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 319S; also C-L: Religion 214S, Jewish Studies 319S, Romance Studies 319S
354. Medieval Christianity in Film and Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 261; 
also C-L: History 244, English 254
357. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Jewish Studies 256; also 
C-L: Religion 212, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 216, History 294, Islamic Studies
390. Topics in Medieval and Renaissance Studies. Topics may focus on fine arts, history, language and 
literature, or philosophy and religion, frequently engaging interdisciplinary perspectives. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390-1. Topics in Renaissance Art. One course. C-L: see Art History 390-1
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Seminar in Medieval and Renaissance Studies. Seminar version of Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 390. Instructor: Staff. One course.
429S. Capstone Seminar: The Black Death and Medieval Society. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
History 460S; also C-L: Global Health 460S
430S. Capstone Seminar: Heresy and Inquisition in the Middle Ages. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. 
C-L: see History 462S
432S. Capstone Seminar: Medieval Communities. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see History 463S
450. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Italian 481; also C-L: Religion 262, Literature 245, History 253
454SA. Sex, Death, and a Little Love: Boccaccio’s Decameron. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see 
Italian 482SA; also C-L: Literature 482SA
458. Spanish Literature of the Renaissance and the Baroque. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see 
Spanish 410
459. Golden Age Literature: Cervantes. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Spanish 411
473. What Machiavelli Really Says. ALP, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 483; also C-L: History 
405, Literature 483, Political Science 483
474S. Dante at Duke and in the World. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Italian 479S; also C-L: Literature 
479S



Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN) 571

504A. History of Netherlandish Art and Visual Culture in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 506A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
505A. History of Netherlandish Art and Visual Culture in a European Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
R One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 507A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
507S. Live Images: Ancient and Medieval Representations of the Divine. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One 
course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 533S; also C-L: Religion 552S, Classical Studies 558S
522. Music in the Middle Ages. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Music 551
523. Topics in Renaissance Music. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Music 552
524. Music in the Baroque Era. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Music 553
550. Early and Medieval Christianity. CZ A survey of the history of Christianity from its beginnings 
through the fifteenth century. Also offered as a Divinity School course. Open to juniors and seniors only. 
Instructor: Doerfler, Pak, Riedel, or Smith. One course.
551. Early Modern, Modern and American Christianity. CZ A survey of the history of Christianity from 
the Reformation to the present, with emphasis on the early modern era. Also offered as a Divinity School course. 
Open to juniors and seniors only. Instructor: Pak or Riedel. One course.
552S. Jerusalem after Rome. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see History 522S
556S. Religion, Conflict and Holy War in the Pre-Modern West: Sects and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS, W One course. C-L: see History 506S
561S. The Margins of Justice: Law and Minorities in the Middle Ages. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 511S
570S. The Society and Economy of Europe, 1400-1700. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 519S
575S. Religion and Society in the Age of the Reformation. CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 523S
576S. Microhistory. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 520S
590. Advanced Topics in Medieval and Renaissance Studies. Topics may focus on fine arts, history, 
language and literature, or philosophy and religion. Open to seniors and graduate students; other students may 
need consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Advanced Seminar in Medieval and Renaissance Studies. Topics may focus on fine arts, history, 
language and literature, or philosophy and religion. These seminar courses frequently engage interdisciplinary 
perspectives, historiography, and interpretation of medieval and Renaissance cultures. Open to seniors and 
graduate students; other students may need consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-1. Topics in Romanesque and Gothic Art and Architecture. One course. C-L: see Art History 
590S-3
590S-2. Topics in Italian Renaissance Art. One course. C-L: see Art History 590S-4
601S. Moliere: The Phenomenon of Laughter. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 525S; also 
C-L: Theater Studies 521S
603. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Italian 582; also C-L: Literature 582
605. Introduction to Old English. ALP One course. C-L: see English 505
607. History of the German Language. One course. C-L: see German 560; also C-L: Linguistics 560
608S. Medieval and Renaissance Latin. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Latin 508S
609S. Old Norse: Introduction to the Language of Viking Scandinavia. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
German 510S; also C-L: Linguistics 562S
615S. Dante Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Italian 583S; also C-L: Literature 583S
618S. Boccaccio Studies. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 584S; also C-L: Literature 584S
625S. Chaucer and His Contexts. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 532S



 Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN)572

630S. Shakespeare: Special Topics. ALP, R One course. C-L: see English 536S
632S. Special Topics in Renaissance Prose and Poetry: 1500 to 1660. ALP, R One course. C-L: see 
English 538S
637S. Shakespeare & Co.: English Renaissance Drama. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Variable credit. C-L: see 
English 537S
642. Medieval Fictions. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 530; also C-L: Literature 541
647S. Latin Palaeography. ALP, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see Latin 584S
648. The Legacy of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 568
650. The Early Medieval Church. CZ Also offered as a Divinity School course. Open to juniors and seniors 
only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
651S. The Early Medieval Church, Out of Africa: Christianity in North Africa before Islam. 
CZ Selected writings of Tertullian, Cyprian, and Augustine, as well as lesser known African Fathers, on topics 
such as the African rite of baptism, African creeds, and African church councils. Focus on major theological, 
liturgical, and pastoral problems in the African church in order to gain perspective on the crucial role of the 
African church in the development of the church in the West. Also offered as a Divinity School course. Open to 
juniors and seniors only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
653. The Sacraments in the Patristic and Early Medieval Period. CZ A study of the celebration and 
interpretation of baptism or eucharist in the church orders and texts of the early church writers. Also offered as 
a Divinity School course. Open to juniors and seniors only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
655. Early Christian Asceticism. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 634; also C-L: Study of Sexualities, 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
659. Justice, Law, and Commerce in Islam. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 660; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 575, International Comparative Studies, Islamic Studies
662. Origen. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 632
664. Augustine. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 633
667. Readings in Latin Ecclesiastical Literature. CCI, CZ Readings in Latin of pastoral, theological, and 
church-disciplinary literature from the late patristic and medieval period. Also offered as a graduate Religion 
and Divinity School course. Open to juniors and seniors only. Prerequisite: knowledge of Latin. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
669S. Medieval Philosophy. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Philosophy 618S
672. The Christian Mystical Tradition in the Medieval Centuries. CZ Reading and discussion of the 
writings of medieval Christian mystics (in translation). Each year offers a special focus, such as: Women at 
Prayer; Fourteenth-Century Mystics; Spanish Mystics. Less well-known writers (Hadewijch, Birgitta of Sweden, 
Catherine of Genoa) as well as giants (Eckhart, Ruusbroec, Tauler, Suso, Teresa of Avila, Julian of Norwich, 
Catherine of Siena, and Bernard of Clairvaux) are included. Also offered as a Divinity School course, and as 
Religion 742. Open to juniors and seniors only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
676. The English Reformation. CZ The religious history of England from the accession of Henry VIII to 
the death of Elizabeth I. Extensive readings in the English reformers from Tyndale to Hooker. Also offered as a 
Divinity School course. Open to juniors and seniors only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-1. Special Topics in Middle English Literature: 1100 to 1500. One course. C-L: see English 530S
690S-2. Topics in Renaissance Studies. One course. C-L: see Italian 590S-1

The Major
The major requires ten courses, two requirements, and eight elective distribution courses taken in the 

following four areas of study: history; fine arts (art and music); language and literature (English, French, German, 
Greek, Italian, Latin, and Spanish); philosophy and religion.



Medieval and Renaissance Studies (MEDREN) 573

Requirements. Students must either participate in the Medieval and Renaissance Focus Program or take 
one course designated as Medieval Cultures and one as Renaissance Cultures. In addition to these two courses, 
students must take the remaining eight elective courses in one of the following distributions: (a) 3-3-2-0, three 
courses in two of the four areas of study and two courses in a third area; or (b) 3-3-1-1, three courses in two of the 
four areas of study and one course in each of the other two areas.

Each program is tailored to the needs and interests of the student. After discussion with the associate director 
or director of undergraduate studies for Medieval and Renaissance Studies, the student submits a provisional 
program of study outlining special interdisciplinary interests. Normally the program is planned before the end 
of the sophomore year to allow time to acquire a working knowledge of languages pertinent to specific interests.

Graduation with Distinction
Majors are encouraged to pursue honors work in an area of special interest.
Procedure for Selection of Students. The student should apply to the director of undergraduate studies 

or program coordinator during the junior year, and must maintain a minimum GPA of 3.5 in the Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies major.

Expected Product. A written thesis based on at least one independent study (Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 491, 493) with a Medieval and Renaissance studies faculty member who directs the thesis.

Evaluation Procedure. Evaluation by a committee of three Medieval and Renaissance Studies faculty 
members appointed by the director of undergraduate studies, one of whom must be the thesis director.

Levels of Distinction. Recommendation from the review committee for distinction, high distinction, and 
highest distinction based on the quality of the thesis and on performance in the major program.

Special Courses. The Medieval and Renaissance Studies independent study courses (Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 491, 493) may count toward the major. The thesis may be written in conjunction with 
independent study work in either the junior or senior year.

The Minor
Requirements. Five courses, two of which must be Medieval and Renaissance Studies Focus Program 

courses or courses designated as Medieval Cultures and Renaissance Cultures. The three remaining courses 
may be taken in any distribution suiting the student’s interests in consultation with a Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies advisor.

The Four Course Study Areas
The following courses are taken in distributions across four areas of study. Some of these courses are 

available in more than one study area. Cross-listed courses may count toward the major or minor in both Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies and in the cross-listed departments or programs.

Area 1: Fine Arts 
201S, 215, 217, 225, 226, 227, 229A, 233, 240, 242A, 243A, 244, 245, 246, 290-1, 390-1, 504A, 505A, 507S, 

510, 522, 523, 524, 590S-1, 590S-2. 

Area 2: History 
105, 125, 128, 135, 248S, 254, 255, 259, 268, 269, 272, 275, 279, 281, 284, 287, 289, 305S, 343, 343A, 354, 

429S, 430S, 432S, 473, 550, 551, 552S, 556S, 561S, 570S, 575S, 576S.

Area 3: Language and Literature 
290AS-1, 290S-1, 303, 304, 305S, 312, 314, 320S, 321, 330, 331, 332, 334S, 337S, 342A, 343, 343A, 345, 

346, 347, 348S, 450, 454SA, 458, 459, 473, 474S, 603, 605, 607, 608S, 609S, 615S, 618S, 625S, 630S, 632S, 637S, 
642, 647S, 648, 690S-1, 690S-2.

Area 4: Philosophy and Religious Studies 
268, 269, 281, 287, 347, 352S, 354, 357, 430S, 450, 550, 551, 556S, 575S, 603, 650, 651S, 653, 655, 659, 662, 

664, 667, 669S, 672, 675, 676, 677, 679, 680, 682. 



 Military Science—Army ROTC (MILITSCI)574

Additional Topics and Seminar Courses 
The following topics courses are taught in various disciplines and vary from semester to semester. They may 

be taken in any of the above four study areas depending on the nature of their subjects. Students need to consult 
with a Medieval and Renaissance Studies advisor to determine how any one of these courses may be distributed: 
89S, 190A, 190S, 291, 293, 390, 390A, 390S, 491, 493, 590, 590S.

Military Science—Army ROTC
Visiting Professor Macon, Lieutenant Colonel, US Army, Chair; Instructor Dauz, Captain, US Army, Director of 
Undergraduate Studies

The Department of Military Science offers offers students from all disciplines within the university the 
opportunity to study the following subjects: leadership theory and practice; management of time, personnel, 
and logistics; ethics; the role and responsibility of the military in contemporary society; and the philosophy and 
practice of military strategy and tactics. First- year and sophomore-level courses are open to all students and do 
not require full participation in the Army ROTC Program. The leadership laboratory provides students a unique 
and dynamic hands-on leadership experience in addition to an opportunity to put team-building, military skills 
and tactics into practice. The laboratory is an optional course for non-program students enrolled in first-year 
courses. It is mandatory each semester for contracted cadets (both scholarship and non-scholarship) and for 
students who intend to contract or apply for a scholarship.

The Army ROTC Program is a two-year Basic Course of study (first-year and sophomore level) and a two-
year Advanced Course of study (junior and senior level). Basic Course classes are open to all students as leadership 
development electives without any military service obligation unless a student voluntarily chooses to make a 
commitment and sign a contract for military service. Non-contracted students may choose to be participating 
students for one semester (MS 101 or 102 only) which means they only attend the lecture, not the leadership 
laboratory or physical training. Enrolled students/Cadets are required to attend the lecture, leadership laboratory, 
and physical training. The two-year Advanced Course of Study includes a five-week leadership Advanced Camp, 
usually completed during the summer prior to senior year. To be eligible for participation in the Advanced Course, 
students must successfully complete the Basic Course (unless direct entry is approved by the Department Chair), 
be physically qualified, be of good moral character, be a US citizen, have a minimum of two years remaining as a 
student (undergraduate or graduate level), and sign a contract to accept a commission in the United States Army, 
the Army National Guard, or the Army Reserve as directed by the Secretary of the Army. Direct entry into the 
Advanced Course is sometimes permitted if an applicant has previous military training or experience, or if the 
student completes a four-week ROTC Basic Camp leadership training course.

Students who are interested in full program enrollment and scholarship opportunities should consult the 
Department of Military Science (call (919) 660-3091 or (919) 660-3090) for more detailed information). Also see 
the Army Reserve Officers’ Training Corps section under special programs in this bulletin. Information is also 
located on the departmental website (https://arotc.duke.edu), Facebook page (Duke/NCCU Army ROTC), and 
Instagram (Bull City Battalion).

Courses in Military Science—Army ROTC (MILITSCI)
91L. Leadership Laboratory - Fall Semester Only. Introduces students to basic Army operations, 
including team building, map reading, first aid, confidence training, rifle marksmanship, drill and ceremonies, 
Army doctrine and small unit tactics. Must be repeated each fall semester. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Dauz or staff.
92L. Leadership Laboratory - Spring Semester Only. Introduces students to basic Army operations, 
including team building, map reading, first aid, confidence training, rifle marksmanship, drill and ceremonies, 
Army doctrine and small unit tactics. Must be repeated each spring semester. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Dauz or staff.
93L. Senior Leadership Laboratory - Fall Semester. (Seniors only) Introduces students to Army 
operations and case studies associated with the areas. The course includes team building, map reading, first aid, 
confidence training, rifle marksmanship, drill and ceremonies, Army doctrine and small unit tactics. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Macon or staff.
94. Basic Army Physical Development. Introduction to Senior Reserve Officers’ Training Course with 

https://arotc.duke.edu


Military Science—Army ROTC (MILITSCI) 575

studies in basic military fitness. Emphasis on implementation of the Army’s physical fitness program through 
lecture and practical exercises. Familiarizes students with the Army’s height and weight standards. Requires 
participation in three testing sessions to track individual improvement, and participation as leaders in the 
conduct of physical training sessions. Class held in the vicinity of the track, soccer field, ROTC building, and/or 
the pool. Instructor: Dauz or staff. Half course.
94L. Senior Leadership Laboratory - Spring Semester. (Seniors only) Introduces students to Army 
operations and case studies associated with these areas. Includes team building, map reading, first aid, 
confidence training, rifle marksmanship, drill and ceremonies, Army doctrine and small unit tactics. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Macon.
101S. Introduction to the Army. Introduces students to the personal challenges/competencies critical 
for effective leadership and communication. Students learn fundamentals of Army organization, basic Soldier 
skills, as well as critical thinking fundamentals and how they apply to the Army context. The course teaches how 
development of personal skills (cultural understanding, goal setting, time management, stress management, 
and fitness) relate to leadership, and the Profession of Arms. Army leadership dimensions, attributes, and core 
leader competencies also discussed. Instructor: Dauz or staff. Half course.
102S. Foundations of Leadership. EI, SS Examines behavioral science theories (individual, group, and 
organizational) in a small group learning environment to build healthy classroom discourse. It explores the 
professional challenges and competencies that are needed for effective examination of history, psychology, 
leadership/management theories, decision sciences, and military doctrine. Through this course, you will 
examine military ethics, ethical decision making, Geneva Convention rules, and NATO rules of engagement. 
Instructor: Dauz or staff. Half course.
201. Leadership and Ethics. Explore the theory and practical application of group dynamics, team building, 
and innovative leadership in both civilian and military contexts. Students will participate in the practical 
application of personal motivation and team-building through planning, executing and assessing team exercises. 
Builds on concepts taught in Military Science 101S and 102S. Leadership Laboratory (91L) and physical training 
are required for all enrolled cadets. Recommended prerequisite: Military Science 101S and 102S, unless waived 
by the director of undergraduate studies—contact the Army ROTC Department for more information. Graduate 
students contact Army ROTC Department for enrollment eligibility. Instructor: Dauz or staff. One course.
202S. Army Doctrine and Decision-Making. EI, SS Examines behavioral science theories (individual, 
group, and organization) in a small group learning environment in order to build healthy classroom discourse. 
Students will be exposed to the professional challenges and competencies that are needed for effective execution 
of the profession of arms through the examination of history, psychology, leadership/management theories, 
decision sciences, and military doctrine. Through this course, students will examine military ethics, ethical 
decision-making, Geneva Convention rules, and NATO rules of engagement. Instructor: Dauz or staff. One 
course.
291. Independent Study. Individual study under direct faculty supervision. Written consent of instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Dauz or staff. One course.
291-1. Independent Study - Half Credit. Individual study under the direct faculty supervision. Written 
consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Dauz or staff. Half course.
301. Training Management and the Warfighting Functions. The study, practice, and evaluation of 
adaptive leadership skills in the context of squad tactical operations. Focus on developing cadets’ tactical 
leadership abilities in preparation for ROTC’s summer Advanced Camp leadership course. Laboratory required 
for Army ROTC cadets. Instructor consent required. Recommended prerequisite: completion of first two years of 
ROTC or prior military experience. Instructor: Dauz or staff. One course.
302S. Applied Leadership in Small Unit Operations. EI, SS Examines behavioral science theories 
(individual, group, and organization) in a small group learning environment in order to build healthy classroom 
discourse. The course will expose students to the professional challenges and competencies that are needed 
for effective execution of the profession of arms through the examination of history, psychology, leadership/
management theories, decision sciences, and military doctrine. Through this course, students will examine 
military ethics, ethical decision-making, Geneva Convention rules, and NATO rules of engagement. Instructor: 
Dauz or staff. One course.



 Military Science—Army ROTC (MILITSCI)576

310. American Military History. Examines America’s unique experience of warfare and the development 
of military institutions and military policy in the United States. Explores the country’s military history from 
Colonial era to the present, with emphasis on the Revolutionary War, Civil War, frontier wars, America’s rise to 
great power status, World War I and World War II, and conflicts of the Cold War era. Also examines America’s 
civil-military relations. Instructor: Dauz or staff. One course.
370S. Diversity in the American Military. Examines effects of the various individual characteristics, 
especially gender, race, ethnicity, religion, region, sexual orientation, and status, on the American military. 
Considers interplay between cultural values, norms, beliefs, and attitudes as well as other factors such 
as technological change, demographic patterns, occupational structures, labor shortages, and military 
effectiveness. Policy questions are considered, including arguments and evidence regarding inclusion and 
exclusion in the armed forces of the U.S. Instructor: Dauz. One course.
401S. The Army Officer. EI Explores dynamics of leading in complex situations of current military 
operations. Examines differences in customs/courtesies, military law, principles of war, and rules of engagement 
in the face of international terrorism. Explores aspects of interacting with non-government organizations, 
civilians on the battlefield, decision-making processes, and host nation support. Emphasis placed on preparing 
students for Officer Basic Course and first unit of assignment. Uses mission command case studies/scenarios 
to prepare students to face complex ethical demands of serving as a commissioned officer in the US Army. 
Instructor consent required. Recommended prerequisite: Military Science 301 and 350. Instructor: Macon or 
staff. One course.
402S. Company Grade Leadership. EI, SS Examines behavioral science theories (individual, group, and 
organization) in a small group learning environment in order to build healthy classroom discourse. It explores 
professional challenges and competencies that are needed for effective execution of the profession of arms 
through the examination of history, psychology, leadership/management theories, decision sciences, and 
military doctrine. Through this course, students will examine military ethics, ethical decision-making, Geneva 
Convention rules, and NATO rules of engagement. Instructor: Macon or staff. One course.

Music
Professor Bagg, Chair; Associate Professor of the Practice Mösenbichler-Bryant, Director of Undergraduate 
Studies; Professors Brothers, Jaffe, Lindroth, Rupprecht, and Todd; Associate Professors Meintjes, Waeber, and 
Supko; Assistant Professors Giles, Stoia, and Wang; Professors Emeriti Berliner, Bryan, Gilliam, and Silbiger; 
Professors of the Practice Bagg, Brown, Davidson, Ku, Parkins, Pritchard, and Wynkoop; Professors of the Prac-
tice Emeriti Dunn and Raimi; Associate Professors of the Practice Kelley, Mösenbichler-Bryant, and Stinson; 
Associate Professors of the Practice Emeriti Love and Troxler; Instructors Byrne, Copeland-Burns, Cotton, Cur-
tis, Duarte, Eagle, Fancher, Federle, Finucane, Gilmore, Greenberg, Heid, Jensen, Kris, Kunttu, Linnartz, Liu, 
Newsome, Niketopoulos, Paolantonio, Reed, Roberts, Robinson, Simmons, Thompson, Van Sant, Yonan, and 
Zimmerman

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Music is among the most ancient of human pursuits and has long been viewed as a crucial part of education. 

As a discipline it has its own logic and grammar, in the understanding of which the mind is stretched and tested. 
Students at Duke encounter a variety of approaches to music that encompass the many ways that we create, 
perform, and comprehend it.

Courses fall into three broad categories: theory and composition, literature and history, and applied 
music (performance). Within these are included many kinds of instruction, such as lessons in performance and 
composition; theory; history and literature lectures and seminars; electronic music classes; ensembles; practical 
laboratory work (such as ear-training), coaching sessions in chamber music; and classes in jazz improvisation. 
Students’ musical activity can vary widely across the spectrum. Almost every student has some personal 
involvement with music, and the courses aim to further that involvement, whether it is a simple hobby or a 
compelling interest.



Music (MUSIC) 577

Courses in Music (MUSIC)

Theory and Composition
161. Introduction to Music Theory. ALP Rudiments of music theory, including meter, major-minor 
tonality, chordal vocabulary. Introduction to harmony, four-part chorale writing. Instructor: Staff. One course.
162S. Introduction to Composition: Explorations in Musical Time and Space. ALP Exploration, in 
seminar/workshop format, of sound and music, expressed through projects involving instruments, voices, and 
intermedia. Consideration of the current field will provide concrete examples, ranging widely across “kinds of 
music.” Investigations will touch on music theory and acoustics, orchestration, music technology and analysis. 
Primary emphasis on composing: creative discovery of expressive possibilities and compositional value of 
craft. Intended for students who may have written songs or composed, and who would like to continue their 
explorations. Instructor: Jaffe or Supko. One course.
171. Jazz Combo and Improvisation I. ALP The theory of jazz improvisation and its practical application 
to the different styles of jazz. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
172. Jazz Combo and Improvisation II. ALP See Jazz Improvisation I. Prerequisite: Music 171 or consent 
of instructor. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
176. The Songwriter’s Vocabulary. ALP Writing songs in various twentieth-century popular styles. 
Fundamentals of form, harmony, voice leading, text setting, and production. Prerequisite: Music 161 or consent 
of instructor. Instructor: Zimmerman or staff. One course.
218. Musical Theater Workshop: Performance. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 211; also C-L: 
Dance 211
261. Theory and Practice of Tonal Music I. ALP Elementary principles of tonal organization: diatonic 
chord progressions and figured bass, two-part elementary counterpoint, introduction to musical forms. Writing 
of chorale-style settings. Laboratory. Prerequisites: basic knowledge of musical notation and vocabulary, 
including scales, basic chords and intervals, key signatures, meter, and rhythm; or Music 161. Instructor: Kelley, 
Lindroth, Parkins, Rupprecht, Stoia, Supko, or Wynkoop. One course.
273S. Introduction to Electronic Music Composition. ALP, STS Introduction to composing electronic 
music using variety of software such as Logic, ProTools, Ableton, Audacity, Max/MSP, SuperCollider, etc. 
Concepts covered include recording/editing/mixing; plugin FX; MIDI; sampling; synthesis, etc. Readings and 
listening assignments explore history of electronic music. Course relevant to wide array of student musical 
interests, from experimental to EDM. Instructor: Supko, Lindroth, or staff. One course. C-L: Information 
Science + Studies
274S. Computer Music. ALP, R Computer music composition with an emphasis on digital synthesis, 
sampling, and related technologies. Study of recent computer music repertory. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Lindroth, Supko, or staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
281T. Composition I. ALP, R Same as Music 281S, in tutorial format. Composing original music in smaller 
forms for voice, piano, and other instruments. Studies in compositional techniques. Prerequisites: Music 261 
and 361 or consent of instructor. Not open to students who have taken Music 281S. Instructor: Jaffe, Kelley, 
Lindroth, or Supko. One course.
288S. Music as Biology. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 288S; also C-L: Psychology 288S
290S-2. Special Topics in Music Theory. Topics vary. Prerequisite: Music 361 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Brown, Jaffe, Lindroth, Rupprecht, Stoia, or staff. One course.
295S. Arts Entrepreneurship. Student teams work on specific arts-based entrepreneurial projects. Teams 
comprised of students from different backgrounds (arts, engineering, economics, computer science). Goals 
include creating business plan and launching ventures in areas of the arts. Structure an adaptation of Fuqua 
Program for Entrepreneurs. Ideal projects have real/positive impact on society. Students learn to situate 
artistic creativity within projects that meet societal need. Students from any background welcome to apply 
for enrollment. Must have interest in arts or working with artists in entrepreneurial context. Admission by 
permission of instructors. Instructor: Supko, Green, or staff. One course. C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 



 Music (MUSIC)578

295S, Dance 201S, Visual and Media Studies 295S, Theater Studies 312S, Documentary Studies 295S, Visual 
Arts 295S
361. Theory and Practice of Tonal Music II. ALP Chromaticism, modulation, musical forms, and 
counterpoint. Writing of short pieces (dance forms, variations, songs). Laboratory. Prerequisite: Music 261. 
Instructor: Kelley, Lindroth, Rupprecht, Stoia, Supko, or staff. One course.
381T. Composition II. ALP, R Same as Music 381S, in tutorial format. Individual lessons in compositional 
techniques. See Music 151 or 151A. Prerequisites: Music 261, 361, and 281S or 281T OR consent of instructor. 
Not open to students who have taken Music 381S. Instructor: Jaffe, Kelley, Lindroth, or Supko. One course.
390S-1. Advanced Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
390T. Special Music Topics Tutorial. Small group instruction on focused music topics. Topics vary each 
semester. Instructor: Departmental Staff. One course.
461. Theory and Practice of Tonal Music III. ALP Extended chromatic techniques of the nineteenth 
century, extended tonality, and larger forms. Writing of larger pieces (character pieces, rondo, sonata). 
Laboratory. Prerequisite: Music 361. Instructor: Jaffe, Kelley, Lindroth, Rupprecht, or Stoia. One course.
463S. Theory and Practice of Post-Tonal Music. ALP Analytical studies and compositions in various 
forms, techniques, and styles, with an emphasis on twentieth-century music. Prerequisite: Music 461 or consent 
of instructor. Instructor: Jaffe, Rupprecht, or Supko. One course.
465S. Counterpoint. R Polyphonic practice of the late baroque: writing of two- and three-part compositions 
in a variety of genres (baroque dances, inventions, preludes, fugues). Prerequisite: Music 461 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Jaffe, Kelley, Supko, or Stoia. One course.
481T. Advanced Composition. ALP, R Individual weekly sessions for advanced students. May be repeated 
for credit. Prerequisites: Music 281S and 381S or consent of instructor. Instructor: Jaffe, Kelley, Lindroth, or 
Supko. One course.

History, Literature, and Ethnomusicology
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Brothers, Davidson, Jaffe, Todd, 
Waeber, or staff. One course.
117. Aspects of Performance. ALP, CZ Course designed as academic companion to large performance 
projects. Includes exploration of topics related to the composer, the work, and its performance history and 
practice. Enrollment not restricted to ensemble members. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
120. Music: An Introduction. ALP, CCI, CZ Study of the components of music (e.g. melody, rhythm) 
through comparative listening to styles from different places and times, ranging from current popular artists to 
classical, jazz, and world music. Discussion of the shared and unique aspects of these styles, their historical and 
cultural links, and how those shape our tastes. Instructor: Kelley, Mösenbichler-Bryant, or staff. One course.
126. Acoustics and Music. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Physics 136
129S. Sound, Music, and the Moving Image. ALP, CCI, CZ, W Introduction to film studies with 
emphasis on uses and functions of sound, film music, sound and other aural objects such as the voice, through a 
selected body of works. Topics include representations of sound, music and voice, the functions of pre-existing 
music and their relations with the moving image in cinema and television; gendered representations of music 
and voice in pop and rock music videos; Hollywood practices and non-Hollywood practices. Instructor: Waeber. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 217S, International Comparative Studies
130. World Music: Aesthetic and Anthropological Approaches. ALP, CCI, CZ Study of musical 
styles and practices in relation to issues of creativity, forms of power, and cultural survival; focus on the music 
and experiences of indigenous peoples, refugees, migrants, and immigrants. Instructor: Meintjes or staff. 
One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 131, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 130, 
International Comparative Studies, Documentary Studies, Human Rights
132L. African Dance Percussion. Half course. C-L: see Dance 132L
133S. African Mbira Music: An Experiential Learning Class. ALP, CCI, CZ Building and performing 



Music (MUSIC) 579

one of Africa’s most popular musical instruments, the mbira (a kalimba or “finger piano”). Ethnomusicological 
readings on the instrument’s history, role in society, and meaning for musicians. Analysis of musical examples; 
learning the mbira’s repertory and mastering skills common to many forms of African music, including 
performance of polyrhythms, responsive integration of instrumental and vocal patters, and formulation of 
unique renditions of pieces through improvisation. Weekly class labs. Course requires no prior experience with 
music or woodworking. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 109S, Cultural 
Anthropology 133S
137. Music, Social Life, and Scenes. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W Study of musical styles and performance 
practices in relation to issues of identity and other aspects of social life; focus on the diverse local musical scenes 
and traditions and on learning through doing original fieldwork. Instructor: Meintjes, Byerly, or staff. One 
course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 137, Documentary Studies
140. Introduction to Jazz. ALP, CCI Lecture version of Music 140D. Instructor: Brown. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 140
143. History of Rock: Rhythm & Blues and Rock & Roll to Indie Rock and Hip-Hop. ALP, CZ The 
history of rock music from the 1950s to the present. Beginning with its roots in rhythm and blues, country and 
western, and commercial pop, examination of diverse musical styles, artists and bands, and the many historical, 
technological, and cultural factors that have contributed to the rise and popularity of rock music. Instructor: 
Stoia or staff. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 139, History 108
144. Meet the Beatles and the 1960s. ALP, CZ, EI The music of the Beatles in the context of 1960s 
counterculture: rock and roll rebellion, Dylan and psychedelic drugs, recording studio techniques, Eastern 
religion and the anti-war movement. Instructor: Brothers. One course.
145. Hip-Hop/Rap Music Appreciation. ALP This course explores the development of Hip-Hop and Rap 
music from an inner-city expression of music into a worldwide social and cultural movement. Rap, considered 
popular music at the beginning of the 21st century, has a huge influence on mainstream culture. Students will 
have a unique opportunity to develop and/or enhance their knowledge and comprehension of this popular and 
influential genre. Instructor: Roberts. One course.
146. Motown and American Soul Music. ALP, CCI, CZ During the 1960’s, in Detroit, Michigan, a 
landmark in music was established: The Motown Sound. This aural kaleidoscope of high quality, dynamic song 
creation was established through a confluence of talent and hard work by people whose names now line the halls 
of fame for popular music. Some of these luminaries include Berry Gordy, Diana Ross, Stevie Wonder, Marvin 
Gaye, and Holland-Dozier-Holland. This course will investigate the societal and musical factors that gave rise 
to such a distinctive aesthetic, also framing this phenomenon as a point of comparison to a range of commercial 
music styles, including Philly Soul, Southern Soul, RnB, and current musical trends. Instructor: Kelley and Neal. 
One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 146
165. Let’s Dance! Live Art and Performance. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 165; also C-L: 
Theater Studies 104
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Music. Topics differ by section. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Seminar. Topics vary each semester. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: 
Brothers, Giles, or Jaffe. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
220S. Writing the Musical Book. ALP, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 216S; also C-L: English 
228S
221S. Writing About Music. ALP, W Selected topics in writing about music, to include a range of musical 
genres and styles engaged through listening, analytical study, and concert attendance. Topics may vary each 
semester and include studies of critical prose, reviews, various kinds of analysis, program notes, abstracts, music 
itself as criticism, use of musical examples, bibliography. Prerequisite: Music 161 or basic knowledge of music 
vocabulary or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
234. Sound and Society in East Asian Contexts. ALP, CCI, CZ Investigation of the human condition 



 Music (MUSIC)580

in East Asian cultural and historical contexts through the lens of classical, theatrical, folk, and popular musics 
from China, Taiwan, Japan, the two Koreas, and the global diaspora. No previous background in music or Asian 
Studies is required. Instructor: Wang. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 120
236. African Music: Sound, History, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, EI, SS, STS This class is about the 
sound, culture, politics and history of African music as heard in the world today. We will sample diverse styles 
and practices from around the continent, including live and recorded musics, “popular” and “traditional” styles, 
and sacred and secular practices. The class aims to teach you about the music “itself”, the African history of the 
international music industry, and about the social value of music, exploring how the patterns of circulation of 
African music could augment or diminish African problems, Africa’s promise, and Africans’ creative gifts to the 
world. Instructor: Meintjes. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 235, International Comparative Studies 259
239S. Sound in Social Life. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 222S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 246S
239SA. Sound in Social Life. ALP, CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 222SA; also 
C-L: International Comparative Studies 246SA
243S. American Musicals. ALP One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 210S
244S. Giants of Jazz: A Journey into the Lives and Music of the Masters of Jazz Music. ALP, 
CCI In the Giants of Jazz Seminar, students will delve deeply into the music and lives of the biggest names in 
Jazz. Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Charlie Parker, Duke Ellington, Art Blakey and Cannonball Adderly (to name 
a few) are among those who created various levels of the art form known as jazz, and this course allows students 
a unique opportunity to get down and dirty with the music and blueprint they left for the world to enjoy. This 
highly interactive course engages students with the Professor, and it is a fun and exciting way to get up close and 
personal with some of the greatest music and musicians of all time. Instructor: Brown. One course. C-L: African 
& African American Studies 252S
249. Hollywood Film Music. ALP Film scores from the 1930s to the present. Technical, structural, and 
aesthetic issues, as well as the problem of musical style. Instructor: Waeber or staff. One course.
253. Beethoven and His Time. ALP, CCI The music of Beethoven and its relation to contemporary political 
and cultural developments. Instructor: Todd. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
255S. Music History I: Antiquity Through Renaissance. ALP, CCI, CZ The history of music in medieval 
and early Europe in its cultural and social context. Prerequisite: Music 261 or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Brothers or Giles. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 201S
256S. Music History II: 1600 through Mozart. ALP, CCI, CZ, R The history of music in Europe in its 
cultural and social context. Prerequisite: Music 261 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Waeber or Giles. One 
course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
257. Music History III: Beethoven through WWI. ALP, CCI, CZ, R The history of music in nineteenth-
century through post-WWI Europe and the United States in its cultural and social context. Prerequisite: Music 
261 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Todd. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
258. Music History IV: Post-WWI through the Present. ALP, CZ, R The history of music in twentieth- 
and twenty-first-century Europe and the United States in its cultural and social context. Prerequisite: Music 261 
or consent of instructor. Instructor: Rupprecht or Todd. One course.
259. Modern and Experimental Music. ALP, W A survey of Debussy, Stravinsky, Bartók, Varèse, Ives, 
and other composers who transformed music in Europe and the United States before World War II, as well as 
prominent post-war figures such as Lutoslawski, Messiaen, and Carter. Topics include the changing role of the 
composer in society, relationships to literary and visual modernism, the evolution of musical technology, and 
the composer’s dialogues with vernacular music and other traditions. Instructors: Jaffe, Lindroth, Kelley, or 
Rupprecht. One course.
289. Music and the Brain. ALP, NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 289
290. Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.



Music (MUSIC) 581

290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Music. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290S-1. Special Topics in Music History. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-3. Special Topics in Ethnomusicology. Topics to be announced addressing a range of musical 
traditions from around the world. Instructor: Meintjes or staff. One course.
290S-4. Special Topics in Jazz. Topics vary. Also taught as African & African American Studies 141S. 
Prerequisite: Music 140 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Brothers, Brown, or staff. One course.
305S. Writing about Performance. ALP, CCI, R, W One course. C-L: see Writing 305S; also C-L: Dance 
302S, Theater Studies 283S
314. Thinking through the Body: Becoming an Ordinary Genius. ALP Half course. C-L: see Dance 314; 
also C-L: Theater Studies 304
325A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization. ALP, CCI, FL One course. 
C-L: see Spanish 344A; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 348A, Latin American Studies, Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South
326S. The Art of Performance. ALP Fundamental issues in musical performance, examined through 
performing, comparative listening, readings, and discussion. In-class performance required. Prerequisites: 
Ability to read music and proficiency in instrumental or vocal performance. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Dunn or staff. One course.
335. The History of Hip-Hop. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 335; also 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 335, Visual and Media Studies 337, English 381
336. The Black Performance Tradition: Michael Jackson and Prince. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 336; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 353
337S. Introduction to Hip-Hop Production. ALP, EI, STS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 325S
342. Music for Dancers. ALP One course. C-L: see Dance 375
371. Artists in Healthcare: Collaborations and Complexities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Dance 371; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 374, Theater Studies 371
390. Advanced Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
490S. Advanced Topics in Music. Primarily for junior and senior music majors. Topics to be announced. 
Prerequisites: Music 255S, 256S, 257, and 461. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Advanced Students
501. Introduction to Musicology. ALP, R Methods of research on music and its history, including studies 
of musical and literary sources, iconography, performance practice, ethnomusicology, and historical analysis, 
with special attention to the interrelationships of these approaches. Instructor: Rupprecht or staff. One course.
551. Music in the Middle Ages. ALP, R Selected topics. Instructor: Brothers or Giles. One course. C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 522
552. Topics in Renaissance Music. ALP, R Selected topics. Instructor: Brothers, Giles, or staff. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 523
553. Music in the Baroque Era. ALP, R Selected topics. Instructor: Brothers, Giles, or staff. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 524
554. Music in the Classic Era. ALP, R Selected topics. Instructor: Todd. One course.
555. Music in the Nineteenth Century. ALP, R Selected topics. Instructor: Todd. One course.



 Music (MUSIC)582

556. Music in the Twentieth Century. ALP, R Selected topics. Instructor: Brothers, Rupprecht, Stoia, or 
Todd. One course.
560. Tonal Analysis. ALP, R In-depth study of various methods for analyzing tonal music. Approach and 
content vary by instructor. Instructor: Stoia, Todd, or staff. One course.
561S. Analysis of Early Music. ALP Selected areas of “pre-tonal” music and various analytical 
methodologies that have been developed to understand them. Content changes, from semester to semester and 
with different instructors. Possible areas covered include plainchant, trouvère monophony, Machaut, Fifteenth-
century polyphony, modal music of the Renaissance, early seventeenth-century repertories. Instructors: 
Brothers, Giles, or staff. One course.
562. Analysis of Music After 1900. ALP Introduction to analytic and theoretic methodologies for engaging 
the structures and rhetoric of a range of art-music styles since 1900. Readings in atonal and twelve-tone 
theories; hexatonic and octatonic pitch collections; neo-Riemannian transformations; voice leading, metric and 
rhythmic theories. Theory-based analysis of selected repertory. Instructor: Rupprecht or Staff. One course.
575S. Generative Media Authorship - Music, Text & Image. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 575S; 
also C-L: Information Science + Studies 575S, Computational Media, Arts & Cultures 575S
590. Selected Topics in Analysis. An exploration of analytical approaches appropriate to a diversity of 
music, which may include settings of literary texts, pre-tonal music, and music in oral and vernacular traditions. 
Prerequisite: Music 560 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Rupprecht, Stoia, or staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
595. Language, Music and Dementia: Neuroscience Approaches. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Linguistics 595; also C-L: Neuroscience 595
663. Theories and Notation of Contemporary Music. ALP, R The diverse languages of contemporary 
music and their roots in the early twentieth century, with emphasis on the problems and continuity of musical 
language. Recent composers and their stylistic progenitors: for example, Ligeti, Bartók, and Berg; Carter, 
Schoenberg, Ives, and Copland; Crumb, Messiaen, and Webern; Cage, Varèse, Cowell, and Stockhausen. 
Instructor: Jaffe, Lindroth, Rupprecht, or Supko. One course.
690S-1. Composition Seminar: Selected Topics. Selected topics in composition. Instructor: Jaffe, 
Lindroth, or Supko. One course.
691S. Black Sonic Culture—Analog to Digital. One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
622S; also C-L: English 691S, Literature 691S
697. Composition. Weekly independent study sessions at an advanced level with a member of the graduate 
faculty in composition, producing musical scores (or in some cases, audio documents) which accrue towards the 
production of a portfolio. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Jaffe, Lindroth, or Supko. One course.
698. Composition. Continuation of Music 697. Weekly independent study sessions at an advanced level with 
a member of the graduate faculty in composition, producing musical scores (or in some cases, audio documents) 
which accrue towards the production of a portfolio. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Jaffe, Lindroth, 
or Supko. One course.
699. Composition. ALP Continuation of Music 698. Weekly independent study sessions at an advanced 
level with a member of the graduate faculty in composition, producing musical scores (or in some cases, audio 
documents) which accrue towards the production of a portfolio. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Jaffe, Lindroth, or Supko. One course.

Independent Study
Admission will be subject to the approval of the director of undergraduate studies and the instructor. 

The instructor and course content will be established in accordance with the individual student’s interests and 
capacities. 
391. Independent Study. Individual directed study in a field of special interest on previously approved topic, 
under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic or artistic product. Consent of instructor 



Music (MUSIC) 583

and the director of undergraduate studies required. One course that can be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and/or theoretical analysis in a field of special 
interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantial paper that contains significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual directed study in a field of special interest on a previously approved 
topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic or artistic product. Consent of 
instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. One course that can be repeated for credit. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.

Applied Music
Provided they qualify by audition, students may enroll in private instruction and participate in ensembles. 

Auditions must be arranged with the instructor prior to registration. Enrollment in an applied music course does 
not guarantee permission to enroll in the instructor’s class or ensemble the following semester; in some cases 
another audition may be required. For those students who wish to study privately but do not qualify for university-
level instruction should contact department faculty for recommendations for local instructors. All applied music 
courses may be repeated for credit, but no more than two ensembles may be taken concurrently.

Credit in Applied Music. Credit for instruction in courses below 210 is granted on the basis of a half 
course per semester for one hour of private instruction per week, or a half course per year for one half hour of 
private instruction or one period of class study. An additional weekly class meeting for performance and criticism 
may be required by the instructor without additional credit.

Fees. Applied music instruction in one medium (instrument or voice) is offered free to declared music 
majors. There is a fee for additional instruction for music majors and all instruction for minors, non-majors, and 
graduate students outside of the Music department. For specific information on those fees (for one-hour and half-
hour private lessons and for class lessons) consult the Office of the Bursar.

Fees are not refundable after the final Drop/Add day.
No charge is made for practice room facilities for students registered at Duke. A fee schedule for the use of 

facilities by others is available from the music department office.
101-5. Class Improvisation. Development of musicianship and interpretation through harmony and 
improvisation, improvisation games, investigations of style and 21st century performance practice. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. Quarter course.
101-6. Class Percussion. ALP Group lessons focused on the development of basic technique for percussion. 
Students will observe their peers during lessons and will perform literature appropriate to each individual’s skill 
level. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Thompson. Quarter course.
115S. Vocal Diction. Introduction to the International Phonetic Alphabet (IPA) with a focus on diction for 
singing in English, Italian, French and German. Students will be required to sing in class. Instructor: Cotton. 
Half course.
210-6. Chinese Music Ensemble. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Chang or Ku. Half course. C-L: 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 145
217SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene). ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 
217SA; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 221SA, Dance 279SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 217SA, 
Markets and Management Studies
316SA. stARTup Project. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 316SA; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 315SA, Dance 307SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 316SA, Markets and Management Studies

Instruction: Half Hour
101-1. Class Piano. A group lesson in which students play assigned pieces for each other and the instructor. 
The instructor works with each student individually. Beginners are welcome as well as students who have taken 
other rudimentary lessons. Each student learns at their own pace and is given some practice time during the 
class period. Assigned pieces will include duets with other members of the class. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Greenberg. Quarter course.



 Music (MUSIC)584

101-2. Class Voice. Group lessons focused on development of basic technique for voice in a master class 
setting. Students will perform song literature appropriate to the individual skill level. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Cotton or Linnartz. Quarter course.
101-3. Introductory Guitar Class. Group lessons focused on the development of basic technique for guitar. 
Students will observe their peers during lessons and will perform literature appropriate to each individual’s skill 
level. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Reed. Quarter course.
101-4. Djembe Class. Group lessons focused on the development of basic technique for djembe. Students 
will observe their peers during lessons and will perform literature appropriate to each individual’s skill level. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Simmons. Quarter course.
101-7. Class Brass. Group lessons focused on the development of basic technique for brass instrumentalists. 
Emphasis placed upon a relaxed approach to tone production and the proper use of air and embouchure 
to produce a musical sound. Students will observe their peers during lessons and will perform literature 
appropriate to each individual’s skill level. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Au. Quarter course.
103-1. Classical Piano. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of 
varying levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-
declared music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Duarte, Heid, Liu, or staff. Quarter course.
103-2. Jazz Piano. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Paolantonio or staff. Quarter course.
103-3. Organ. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Parkins. Quarter course.
103-4. Harpsichord. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Parkins. Quarter course.
104-1. Violin. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Ku, Pritchard, or Robinson. Quarter course.
104-2. Viola. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Bagg or Yonan. Quarter course.
104-3. Cello. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Stinson. Quarter course.
104-4. Double Bass. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Brown. Quarter course.
104-5. Classical Guitar. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of 
varying levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-
declared music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Reed. Quarter course.
104-6. Jazz Guitar. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Van Sant. Quarter course.
104-7. Harp. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Byrne. Quarter course.
105-1. Flute. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Copeland-Burns. Quarter course.



Music (MUSIC) 585

105-2. Oboe. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Newsome. Quarter course.
105-3. Clarinet. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Gilmore. Quarter course.
105-4. Bassoon. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kunttu. Quarter course.
105-5. Saxophone. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Fancher. Quarter course.
105-6. Jazz Saxophone. ALP Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students 
of varying levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-
declared music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Finucane. Quarter course.
106-1. Trumpet. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Eagle. Quarter course.
106-2. French Horn. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Niketopoulos. Quarter course.
106-3. Trombone. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kris. Quarter course.
106-4. Tuba. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kris. Quarter course.
107-1. Percussion. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Thompson. Quarter course.
107-2. Djembe. Weekly, 30-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Simmons. Quarter course.

Instruction: One Hour
203-1. Classical Piano. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of 
varying levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-
declared music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Duarte, Heid, Liu, or staff. Half course.
203-2. Jazz Piano. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Paolantonio or staff. Half course.
203-3. Organ. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Parkins. Half course.
203-4. Harpsichord. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Parkins. Half course.
204-1. Violin. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 



 Music (MUSIC)586

majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Ku, Pritchard, or Robinson. Half course.
204-2. Viola. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Bagg or Yonan. Half course.
204-3. Cello. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Stinson. Half course.
204-4. Double Bass. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Brown. Half course.
204-5. Classical Guitar. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of 
varying levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-
declared music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Reed. Half course.
204-6. Jazz Guitar. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Van Sant. Half 
course.
204-7. Harp. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Byrne. Half course.
205-1. Flute. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Copeland-Burns. Half course.
205-2. Oboe. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Newsome. Half course.
205-3. Clarinet. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Gilmore. Half course.
205-4. Bassoon. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kunttu. Half course.
205-5. Saxophone. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Fancher. Half course.
205-6. Jazz Saxophone. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of 
varying levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-
declared music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Finucane. Half course.
206-1. Trumpet. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Eagle. Half course.
206-2. French Horn. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Niketopoulos. Half course.
206-3. Trombone. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kris. Half course.
206-4. Tuba. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Kris. Half course.



Music (MUSIC) 587

207-1. Percussion. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Thompson. Half course.
207-2. Djembe. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying 
levels. Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared 
music majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Simmons. Half course.
208. Voice. Weekly, 60-minute individual private instruction for undergraduate students of varying levels. 
Ability beyond the beginner stage is required. There is a fee associated with lessons for non-declared music 
majors. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Cotton, Dunn, Federle, Jensen, or Linnartz. Half course.

Ensemble Classes: Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory
210-1. Symphony Orchestra. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Davidson. Half course.
210-2. Wind Symphony. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Mösenbichler-Bryant. Half course.
210-3. Marching Band. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Au. Half course.
210-4. Jazz Ensemble. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Brown. Half course.
210-5. Small Jazz Ensemble. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
211-1. Collegium Musicum. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
211-2. Chamber Music. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Bagg or staff. Half course.
211-3. Piano Ensemble. Chamber music dealing with collaborative piano skills (piano duos, vocal/
instrumental accompanying, sight reading, transposition and orchestral reductions). Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Heid. Half course.
212-1. Djembe Ensemble. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Simmons. Half course.
212-2. Afro-Cuban Percussion. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Simmons. Quarter course.
213-1. Opera Theater. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Heid. Half course.
213-2. Chapel Choir. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
213-3. Chorale. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Wynkoop. Half course.
318. Instrumental Conducting. ALP Development of techniques of conducting instrumental ensembles 
with emphasis on orchestral repertoire. Score-reading and analysis, principles of interpretation, and practical 
conducting experience. Prerequisite: Music 361 and consent of instructor. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Mösenbichler-Bryant or staff. One course.
319. Choral Conducting. ALP Development of techniques of conducting vocal repertoire, ranging from 
church anthems to large-scale works. Score-reading and analysis, principles of interpretation, and practical 
conducting experience. Prerequisite: Music 361 or consent of instructor. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Wynkoop. One course.
390-1. Special Topics in Interpretation and Performance. Interpretative analysis of instrumental 
(piano, strings, winds) and vocal repertoire from baroque to modern composers. Participants expected to 
perform. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Cotton, Dunn, or Linnartz. One course.
401. Advanced Study in Musical Performance. Open only to sophomores, juniors, and seniors possessing 
an exceptional technical and interpretative command of a musical medium. Requires either a half-length recital 
at the end of each semester of study or a full-length recital at the end of the second semester. In the latter case, a 
brief performance before a jury of music department faculty is required at the end of the first semester. May be 
repeated for credit. Prerequisites: previous registration in private instruction in applied music at Duke, audition, 
and consent of instructor. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401-1. Advanced Study in Vocal Music Performance. ALP Open only to sophomores, juniors, and 
seniors possessing an exceptional technical and interpretative command of a musical medium. Requires either a 
half-length recital at the end of each semester of study or a full-length recital at the end of the second semester. 
In the latter case, a brief performance before a jury of music department faculty is required at the end of the first 



 Music (MUSIC)588

semester. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisites: previous registration in private instruction in applied voice 
at Duke, audition, consent of instructor, and completion of or concurrent enrollment in Music 115S. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Cotton, Dunn, Federle, Jensen, or Linnartz. One course.
418. Advanced Study in Conducting. Advanced work in reading scores, analysis, principles of 
interpretation, and practical conducting experience. May be repeated for credit. Prerequisite: Music 318 or 319 
or consent of instructor. Instructor: Davidson, Mösenbichler-Bryant, or Wynkoop. One course.
511-1. Collegium Musicum. An opportunity to study and perform vocal and instrumental music from the 
Middle Ages through the Baroque. Weekly rehearsals; one or two concerts per semester. Audition and consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff.

Other Applied Music Courses
116. Alexander Technique for Musicians, Dancers, and Actors. ALP The Alexander Technique 
provides a structured method of self inquiry which has helped performing artists improve their skills for 
over 100 years. By uncovering and transforming previously unconscious movement patterns and mental 
habits, performers can significantly improve their skills by increasing freedom and ease of movement. All 
instrumentalists and singers with a strong interest and background in performance are welcome. Instructor: 
Pritchard. Half course. C-L: Dance 116, Theater Studies 247
190. Special Topics in Music. Opportunities to engage with a specific issue in music. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
425S. Auditory Neuroscience - From Sound to Music. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 425S; also 
C-L: Psychology 479S

The Major
The requirements present a balanced selection of courses in music theory, history, literature, and 

performance, and are a means of preparing graduates for further professional training in the art of music. The 
music major can also be an attractive pursuit for the well-rounded undergraduate planning a career in another 
field. A sequence of three courses seeks to develop the student’s fluency in music theory, another four semesters 
offer a survey of Western music history. Students pick three further courses from a range of musical styles, 
including jazz, world music, rock, and other electives. As they progress through the major curriculum, students 
develop their practical musicianship and performance skills through music theory labs, applied lessons, and 
participation in music department ensembles.

The music major requires 10.0 course credits.

Major in Music
Prerequisite. Music 261
Requirements. Music 255S, 256S, 257, 258, 361, 461
Applied Music. Two semesters of study in an instrument or voice
Ensemble. Two semesters in a departmental ensemble (excluding Music 210-3)
Three Additional Courses (two of which must be above the level of Music 213) to be chosen from: 
Music 130, 137, 140, 143, 144, and Music courses numbered above 213

Major in Music with Concentration in Performance
Prerequisite. Music 261
Requirements. Music 255S, 256S, 257, 258, 361, 461
Applied Music. At least five semesters of individual applied instruction (Music 103-108, 203-208, 401) 

earning a minimum of four full credits. (This will include two semesters of Music 401—culminating in a full 
recital.)

Additional Performance Requirements. Two full credits of Music 401 Advanced Study in Musical 
Performance, culminating in a recital

Ensemble. Two semesters in a departmental ensemble (excluding Music 210-3)
One Additional Music Elective. Approved by the director of undergraduate studies



Music (MUSIC) 589

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Music majors who have earned a minimum 3.5 average in music courses may undertake work leading to 

departmental Graduation with Distinction. The candidate must make application to the director of undergraduate 
studies by March 20 of the junior year. The project is normally a yearlong endeavor involving an independent 
study (Music 393) or an appropriate graduate seminar each semester of the senior year. It must culminate in 
(a) a substantial paper (historical, analytical, or theoretical); or (b) a full-length recital with a shorter paper or 
composition; or (c) a major composition with a shorter paper or half-length recital. The final project must be 
approved by a faculty committee. 

The Minor
A minimum of 5.5 course credits is required for the minor, of which at least 3.0 full course credits must be 

above the 213 level. 
Requirements:
• Music 261 Theory and Practice of Tonal Music I 

Note: Music 161 Introduction to Music Theory, if taken first, may count as an elective toward the minor.
• One course in music history, selected from the following:

• Music 255S Music History I: Antiquity through Renaissance
• Music 256S Music History II: 1600 through Mozart
• Music 257 Music History III: Beethoven through WWI
• Music 258 Music History IV: Post-WWI through the Present

• Two semester courses in performance from among:
• Music 101-108, 203-213 (excluding 210-3). These courses cover classical or jazz piano, organ, 

harpsichord, violin, cello, string bass, classical or jazz guitar, harp, flute, oboe, clarinet, bassoon, 
saxophone, trumpet, French horn, trombone, tuba, percussions, djembe, voice, and some 
ensembles.

• Music 318 Instrumental Conducting
• Music 319 Choral Conducting
• Music 401 Advanced Study in Musical Performance
• Music 418 Advanced Study in Conducting

• Three elective courses, two must be above the level of Music 213.

Graduation with Distinction in Music Performance for Non-Majors
Candidates for distinction in music performance for non-majors apply to the director of undergraduate 

studies by April 1 of their junior year and are admitted to the program by a faculty committee (the thesis advisor 
must be a regular rank Music department faculty member) on the basis of recent live recordings. During the 
senior year the student will enroll in Music 401 (Advanced Study in Performance) both semesters. A distinction 
in musical performance project consists of (a) a full recital supported by a high-quality audio or video recording 
as documentation of the event; and (b) a written component, either in the form of an analytical paper or other 
organized commentary on the recital. One semester of research independent study (Music 393) is required in 
preparation of the written component. To be awarded distinction a student must maintain a GPA of 3.5 in the core 
music department courses, and a 3.3 GPA overall. For more information, please consult the music department 
website, music.duke.edu.

Naval Science—Naval ROTC
Professor Hertel, Captain, US Navy, Chair; Visiting Associate Professor Arguello, Major, USMC; Visiting Assis-
tant Professor Blackwell, Lieutenant, US Navy, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Visiting Assistant Professors 
Stanich, Captain, USMC; Scott, Lieutenant, US Navy; Heider, Lieutenant, US Navy

Neither a major nor a minor is available in this program. 
Courses in naval science are open to all students. A scholarship program is available for students in the 

department who commit to commissioning into service as an officer in the United States Navy or Marine Corps.
The Department of Naval Science offers students an opportunity to gain a broad-based knowledge in 

http://music.duke.edu


 Naval Science—Naval ROTC (NAVALSCI)590

maritime security, strategy, and leadership. This understanding is derived from the study of maritime and military 
history; current naval operations, ship systems, practices and evolutions used on sea-going vessels around the 
world today; United States’ national strategic goals and operations that accomplish these goals; and the leadership 
and management skills required to accomplish these missions.

The program draws upon the expertise of visiting professors, all of whom are active duty naval officers 
as well as subject matter experts in current naval operations, offering a wide range of backgrounds in surface, 
undersea, air, and land warfare.

Courses in Naval Science—Naval ROTC (NAVALSCI)
101. Introduction to Naval Science. Introduction to the organization, missions, and branches of 
specialization within the United States Navy and Marine Corps. Customs, traditions, leadership, career 
opportunities, and Naval and Marine Corps operations. Instructor: Blackwell.
111. Seapower and Maritime Affairs. CZ, STS This course is a conceptual study of the history and strategy 
of sea faring nations. The course examines the political and military impact of events from the birth of sea 
power in the Mediterranean, to the expansion through the Atlantic Ocean, and the spread of sea power to North 
America. It examines the development of strategy on the seas, and the impact on global economic forces. This 
course uses examples of military engagements on the seas from the American Revolution to the Global War on 
Terrorism and Operation Iraqi Freedom. Instructor: Blackwell. One course.
189L. First Year Naval Leadership Laboratory. Practical application of military discipline, leadership and 
management. Also provides general military training. Mandatory for first year Naval ROTC program students. 
Instructor: Staff.
213S. Evolution of Warfare. CZ, STS Continuity and change in the history of warfare, with attention to the 
interrelationship of social, political, technological, and military factors. Instructor: Stanich. One course.
215S. Amphibious Warfare. Development of amphibious doctrine, with attention to its current applications. 
Instructor: Stanich. One course.
223. Naval Leadership and Management. SS Examination of current and classical leadership and 
management theories, as well as organizational behavior in the context of military organization. Topics include 
managerial functions, performance appraisal, motivation theories, group dynamics, leadership theories and 
communication. Instructor: Arguello. One course.
231. Concepts and Analyses of Naval Tactical Systems. NS The study of weapons systems used aboard 
naval vessels and aircraft. Detection systems and systems integration into current naval platforms and their 
offensive and defensive capabilities. Instructor: Heider. One course.
289L. Second Year Leadership Laboratory. Practical application of military discipline, leadership 
and management. Also provides general military training. Mandatory for second year Naval ROTC program 
students. Instructor: Staff.
331. Naval Ship Systems. NS Quantitative study of basic naval ships’ systems. Focus on detailed ship design, 
hydrodynamic forces, stability, propulsion, electrical theory and distribution, hydraulic theory, and damage 
control. Includes basic theory/design of various ship propulsion systems and case studies on leadership/ethical 
issues in the engineering arena. Instructor: Heider. One course.
353. Navigation. STS Theory, principles, and procedures of ship navigation, movements, and employment. 
Dead reckoning, piloting, celestial and electronic principles of navigation. Corequisite: Naval Science 353L. 
Instructor: Keller. One course.
353L. Navigation Laboratory. Practical application of the theories and principles of navigation as presented 
in the lecture series. Instructor: Keller.
389L. Third Year Naval Leadership Laboratory. Practical application of military discipline, leadership 
and management. Also provides general military training. Mandatory for third year Naval ROTC program 
students. Instructor: Staff.
423S. Leadership and Ethics. EI Capstone Course that examines principles of leadership and ethical 
decision-making through study and interactive discussion of classical and contemporary course documents and 
case studies. Coursework includes Constitutional Law, Natural Law Theory, as well as works by Kant, Mill, and 
Aristotle, among others. Instructor: Hertel. One course.



Neuroscience (NEUROSCI) 591

453. Naval Operations. Components of general naval operations, including concepts and application of 
tactical formations and dispositions, relative motion, maneuvering board and tactical plots, rules of the road, 
and naval communications. Prerequisite: Naval Science 353 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Keller. One 
course.
489L. Fourth Year Naval Leadership Laboratory. Advanced practical application of military discipline, 
leadership and management. Also provides general military training. Instructor: Staff.

Neurobiology
For courses in neurobiology, see Medicine (School)—Graduate (School) Basic Science Courses Open to 

Undergraduates on page 811.

Neuroscience
Associate Professor White, Director of Undergraduate Studies

A major and a minor are available in this program. 
Like the inner workings of the brain itself, neuroscience synthesizes discovery from diverse sources 

of knowledge. The undergraduate curriculum in neuroscience reflects this interdisciplinary perspective and 
challenges students to explore knowledge across levels of analysis: from the molecular and cellular level, through 
the level of neural circuits within which cells are organized and interconnected, and toward the level of behavior 
where the functions of neural circuits and systems, including human cognition, are manifest. A comprehensive 
understanding of neuroscience requires knowledge of each level and integrative learning across levels.

The principal strength of this program is that it provides rich opportunities for undergraduate students 
to study brain science with faculty from diverse disciplines who bring their complimentary perspectives and 
expertise to the classroom and laboratory. Thus, the undergraduate curriculum in neuroscience is truly a joint, 
interdisciplinary major/minor that draws faculty and courses from several departments, chiefly the Department 
of Psychology in the Trinity College of Arts & Sciences. Students may also elect to pursue faculty-mentored 
research and scholarship wherever brain science discovery happens at Duke. Indeed, the broad impact of 
neuroscience discovery now extends beyond the academic disciplines in the natural sciences to spaces where 
neuroscientists collaborate and regularly interact with experts in ethics, law, business, social sciences, philosophy, 
the fine arts and performing arts, and the humanities. Accordingly, our neuroscience curriculum reflects this 
broad interdisciplinary platform for discovery and learning, with a rich offering of coursework and experiences 
that reflect the exciting growth of neuroscience and its increasing relevance to human flourishing, the diverse 
challenges facing society, and the health and wellness of all life.

Courses in Neuroscience (NEUROSCI)
89S. First-Year Seminar Special Topics. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Biological Bases of Behavior: Introduction and Survey. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Psychology 
106
102. Biological Bases of Behavior (Team-Based Learning). NS Introduction to neuroscience that 
explores methods, models, and reasoning that led to discoveries about brain-behavior relations. Students 
learn and apply concepts in neuroanatomy, neurophysiology, synaptic transmission, the somatic sensorimotor 
system, vision, emotions, attention & consciousness, memory & learning, sexual differentiation & orientation, 
and psychopathology. In-class experiences organized around principles of team-based learning, with students 
collaborating in small teams for readiness assessments and team applications. Course fulfills gateway 
requirement for Neuroscience major. First years are welcome. Instructor: Ng. One course. C-L: Psychology 107
103L. Computing and the Brain. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 103L; also C-L: 
Psychology 113L
104L. Interdisciplinary Introduction to Computer Science. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 
102L
116FS. Neuroscience and Human Language. NS, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 216FS; also C-L: 
Science & Society



 Neuroscience (NEUROSCI)592

116S. Neuroscience and Human Language. NS, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 216S; also C-L: 
Russian 216S, Science & Society
123FS. When the Head’s in Trouble: Language, Lesions and Loss. NS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 
123FS
150. Research Practicum. Introduction to faculty-directed research, often preparing the student for 
independent study. Preliminary research activities include readings, regular research discussions, and, for some, 
data collection and analysis, as a means to explore the potential for the more formally planned and intensive 
Research Independent Study and the greater level of commitment required; does not obligate student or faculty 
to subsequent Research Independent Study. Instructor consent required. Satisfactory/unsatisfactory grading 
only. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
153FS. Drugs and the Law. SS Exploration of the relationship between addictive drugs and the law. 
Examine mechanisms by which drugs of abuse affect the brain and decision-making on the individual level, 
and consequences of those effects on the societal level, then examine how society responds to these behaviors 
in terms of attitudes and laws. Compare perspectives of the criminal justice system with that of drug users. 
Class consists of lectures, discussions, guest speakers, and media presentations and a project examining 
cross-generational views on drug use, abuse, and laws. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Schramm-Sapyta. One course. C-L: Public Policy 185FS, Science & Society 153FS
155FS. Vision. NS, W Course will explore the remarkable phenomenology of visual perception and its neural 
basis. Some background in neuroscience is desirable. Open only to students in FOCUS program. Director of 
Undergraduate Studies consent required. Instructor: Purves. One course. C-L: Psychology 155FS
157FS. Games and the Brain. NS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 115FS
190S. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
191FS. Intersections of the Sexual Brain. CCI, CZ, NS, STS Understanding how the human brain 
and environment interconnect evolved dramatically with recent advances in neuroscience research methods. 
Students analyze such interconnections and the impact on societal theories of human sexuality. Students 
assess influential factors such as ethnicity/race, culture, and religion, all diversely represented in contemporary 
America. Students read and discuss scientific and popular articles with historical context and explore the 
consequences of scientific observations on the personal, societal and political levels. Students develop written 
and oral communication skills and work collaboratively with fellow peers. Open only to Focus Program students. 
Instructor: Ng. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 191FS, Psychology 195FS, Study of 
Sexualities 191FS
201. Fundamentals of Neuroscience. NS, STS Course covers broad and rapidly evolving field of 
neuroscience encompassing questions about how humans and other animals experience their world. Learners 
explore the organization of neural systems that sense our environment, plan and execute complex movements, 
encode and retrieve memories, and experience a wide range of emotions. Learners examine brain development 
and how changes in structure and function underlie impacts of neurological and psychiatric disorders. Not 
recommended for first-year students. Prerequisite: Biology 20, 201L, 202L, or 203L and Chemistry 20, 
21,101DL, or 110DL -or-concurrent enrollment in Biology 201L, 202L, or 203L and concurrent enrollment in 
Chemistry 101DL or 110DL. Instructor: Newpher. One course. C-L: Biology 224, Psychology 275
202. Medical Neuroscience: Foundations for the Neurological Sciences. NS Examines the 
functional organization and neurophysiology of the human central nervous system, with a neurobiological 
framework for understanding human behavior. Students learn the anatomy and function of neural systems in 
the brain and spinal cord that mediate sensation, motivate bodily action, and integrate sensorimotor signals 
with memory, emotion, and related cognitive faculties. Provides the foundation for neurological sciences, 
including understanding the impairments of sensation, action, and cognition that accompany injury, disease, 
or dysfunction in the human central nervous system. Prior completion of Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or 
Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107 strongly encouraged. Instructor: White. One course.
211. Brain and Behavior: Translating Neuroscience. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 276
212. Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 257
212D. Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 257D



Neuroscience (NEUROSCI) 593

223. Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology. NS This course will cover the molecular and cellular 
components underlying nervous system function. Topics include the regulation of the neuronal cytoskeleton, 
process outgrowth and axon guidance, transport mechanisms, the generation and propagation of the action 
potential, components of the presynaptic and postsynaptic terminals, growth factors in development and 
regeneration, neuronal stem cells, and sensory signal transduction. Lectures by the instructor and expert guests, 
with regular readings of current and/or historical primary literature. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 20, 
21, 201L or 203L or equivalent, and Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107. 
Instructor: Newpher, Sherwood, and Volkan. One course. C-L: Biology 223
237. Religion and Science. CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Religion 287; also C-L: Study of Ethics 287, 
Marine Science and Conservation
237S. Religion and Science. CCI, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Religion 287S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 
287S
241. Flaubert’s Brain: Neurohumanities. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see French 481; also C-L: 
Literature 246
242A. The Creative Brain: Literature, Arts & Cognition. ALP, NS, STS One course. C-L: see French 
342A; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 246A
245A. Cultured Brain: Neuroscience of Perception and Action. NS Explores mimesis in cognition 
and culture as an emergent product of perceptual and motor processing. Topics include touch, proprioception, 
vision, visual psychophysics and visual perception, motor control, embodied cognition, and functional anatomy 
of the human brain. Exploration of neuroscience theories and controversies in the context of France entails 
observation of social and performative movement, phenomenological examination of visual art, and experiential 
studies of contemporary Parisian culture. Instruction in English. Prior completion of NEUROSCI 101/102 or 
any NEUROSCI Focus Program course recommended. Offered in Duke Neurohumanities in Paris program. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: White and Johnson. One course.
250. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 350, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 350, Romance Studies 350
250S. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 350S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 350S, Romance Studies 350S
252. Philosophy and Neuroscience. SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 252
258. Decision Neuroscience. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Psychology 258
260. Human Cognitive Evolution. NS, SS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 260; also C-L: 
Psychology 255
267. Neuroethics. EI, NS, SS, STS Focus on emerging ethical controversies concurrent with advances in 
neuroscience. Background material covered: concepts and methods in neuroscience; theories of ethics and 
morality from philosophy, law, and other fields. Ethical topics covered: biological bases of morality; emotions 
and decision making; neuroeconomics and neuromarketing; pathologies of mind and behavior; volition and 
legal culpability. Course format: combined lectures, discussion, interactive activities, with case studies and real-
world examples (e.g., neuroimaging as legal evidence). Prior coursework in neuroscience and/or ethical inquiry 
recommended. Instructor: Huettel, Sinnott-Armstrong. One course. C-L: Psychology 278, Philosophy 353, Study 
of Ethics 269
268D. Mechanisms of Animal Behavior. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 268D
274S. Aristotle and Neuroscience. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 374S; also C-L: 
Study of Ethics 274S
277. Looking Inside the Disordered Brain. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 277
278. Sex/Gender - Nature/Nurture: Intersections of Biology and Society. NS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 278; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 278, Psychology 226, Study of 
Sexualities 278
282. Neuroscience of Movement and Athletic Performance. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 282



 Neuroscience (NEUROSCI)594

288S. Music as Biology. NS The course will explore the tone combinations that humans consider consonant 
or dissonant, the scales we use, and the emotions music elicits, all of which provide a rich dataset for exploring 
music and auditory aesthetics in neurobiological terms. Analyses of speech and music indicate that the 
chromatic scale (the set of tones used by humans to create music), consonance and dissonance, worldwide 
preferences for a few dozen scales from the billions that are possible, and the emotions elicited by music in 
different cultures stem from the relative similarity of musical tonalities and the characteristics of voiced (tonal) 
speech. Our brains have evidently evolved to associate these two domains. Instructor: Purves. One course. C-L: 
Music 288S, Psychology 288S
289. Music and the Brain. ALP, NS Musical perception and performance from artistic, subjective and 
neuroscientific perspectives. Presentations/didactic musical performances address how our brain detects 
and represents music, distinguishing music from other sounds, how we learn to perform and create music, 
the effects of music on brain structure and function, musical schema, and musical antecedents and analogues 
in non-humans. Dialog between course directors, a professional musician and neuroscientist, highlights the 
intersection between artistic and scientific perspectives on this fundamental and aesthetic form of human 
expression. Music and/or neuroscience background preferred, but not required. Instructor: Lindroth, Overath. 
One course. C-L: Music 289
290. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Undergraduate. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290-1. Topics in Literature and Neuroscience. One course. C-L: see French 490-1
290A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301L. Bioelectricity (AC or GE). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 301L
322. From Neurons to Brain. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 322
333S. Neuroscience and Nutrition. NS, STS Interdisciplinary course examining neurobiological 
mechanisms and nutrition. Students learn how nutrients and eating behaviors promote brain health and 
wellness. Students will differentiate foods grown on smaller farms versus those produced for grocery stores. 
They will study nutrition labels, fad diets, and public resources for nutrition information. Applied learning 
includes cooking healthy meals and engagement in the Durham community. Co-taught by faculty in Psychology 
& Neuroscience and Community and Family Medicine using team-based learning. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 
101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107. Instructor: Ng and Alphin. One course.
340S. Educational Neuroscience. SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 340S; also C-L: Human 
Development
350. Pharmacology: Drug Actions and Reactions. NS One course. C-L: see Pharmacology and Cancer 
Biology 350
351S. Neuroplasticity and Expertise. NS, W Course addresses brain and behavioral plasticity that results 
from intensive practice and experience. Topics covered include neuroscience of expertise, brain training 
games, biofeedback and neurostimulation, among others. Recommended prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/102 
or Psychology 106/107 AND at least one of the following: Psychology 275/Neuroscience 201/Biology 224, 
Psychology 276D. Instructor: Appelbaum. One course. C-L: Psychology 351S
352S. Social and Affective Neuroscience. CCI, NS, SS Understanding how individual, interpersonal, and 
intergroup behaviors are processed in the brain. Topics include neuroscience of self- and group identity, self-
regulation, social and affective communication, stereotyping, pro- and anti-social behavior, power motivation, 
group cooperation and competition, and cultural differences in emotion processing. Recommended prerequisite: 
one of the following: Psychology 193FS/Neurobiology 193FS/Neuroscience 193FS, Psychology 106/107/
Neuroscience 101/102, Psychology 257/Neurobiology 212, or Psychology 275D/Neurobiology 201D/Biology 
224D. Instructor: LaBar. One course. C-L: Psychology 280S
353S. Neuroplasticity and Disease: Molecules, Cells, and Circuits. NS, W Explore the cellular 
and molecular mechanisms that alter brain function in diverse neurological disorders, with an emphasis on 
understanding how disruptions of neural circuits drive behavioral and cognitive dysfunction. Students read 



Neuroscience (NEUROSCI) 595

and critically evaluate primary literature on topics including Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, ALS, 
autism spectrum disorders, intellectual disabilities, and traumatic brain injuries. Classes utilize a combination 
of lectures, invited guest speakers, and team-based learning exercises to create a highly interactive learning 
environment. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 201/Psychology 275/Biology 224, or concurrent enrollment. 
Instructor: Newpher. One course. C-L: Psychology 353S
355S. Visual Perception and the Brain. NS, W Course explores how what we see is generated by the visual 
system. Students learn how the visual system links stimulus patterns with reproductive success without ever 
recovering real-world properties and without invoking feature detection, image representation in the brain, 
and probabilistic inference. Course considers in broader terms the relationship between the objective world 
and subjective human experience. Course delivered in flipped format with all lectures assigned as videos and 
class time devoted entirely to discussion of papers, problems and different perspectives on how the visual brain 
operates. Instructor: Purves. One course. C-L: Philosophy 355S, Psychology 355S
360. Drugs, Brain, and Behavior. NS One course. C-L: see Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 360; also 
C-L: Psychology 274
363. Behavior and Neurochemistry. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 273
366S. Behavioral Neuroendocrinology. NS, W One course. C-L: see Psychology 376S
373. Behavioral Neuroimmunology: Brain and Behavior in Health and Disease. NS One course. 
C-L: see Psychology 279
376. Contemporary Neuroscience Methods. NS Explore the wide spectrum of methods commonly used 
in the field of neuroscience, ranging from molecular/genetic to electrophysiology and whole brain imaging. 
Multiple units of this team-based learning course will include interaction with a scientist currently practicing 
the technique. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107. Instructor: 
Newpher. One course. C-L: Psychology 313
378L. Perception and the Brain. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Psychology 308L
379L. Comparative Neuroanatomy. NS For advanced undergraduate students in the brain-related 
sciences who want to acquire an in-depth understanding of vertebrate neuroanatomy. Course focused on the 
primate central nervous system, with aspects of brain organization in rodents and other vertebrates presented 
throughout the semester. Reading assignments include book chapters, videos, and selected research articles. 
Grades are based on exams and periodic quizzes that test understanding of material in lectures and reading 
assignments. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107. Instructor: 
Watson. One course. C-L: Psychology 379L
380L. Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain. NS, STS Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain. 
Overview of the structure of the human brain and spinal cord with team-based learning approaches and 
laboratory-based discovery. Hands-on examination of human brain specimens with guided explorations of 
external and internal brain structures. Dissections of human brains to facilitate discovery. Extensive use of 
interactive digital media to explore the gross anatomy of the central nervous system and the organization of 
the major neural systems underlying sensory, motor and cognitive function. Analysis of actual clinical cases 
representing a variety of neurological disorders. Minimum prerequisites: Neuroscience 101/102 or 201. 
Instructor: White. One course. C-L: Psychology 375L
381LA. Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Biology 
373LA; also C-L: Environment 373LA, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
382L. Functional Neuroimaging. NS, R One course. C-L: see Psychology 303L
383L. Brain Waves and Cognition. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Psychology 302L
385L. Integrative Neuroscience Laboratory. NS, R, W Gain skills necessary to conduct neuroscience 
research and integrate findings from multiple levels of analysis (molecular, cellular and behavioral). Team-
based learning format and collaboration with neuroscience lab to generate, analyze, and communicate novel 
scientific findings. Experimentation will occur in a model organism and may include PCR, live cell imaging and/
or behavioral conditioning experiments. Instructor: Volkan. One course. C-L: Biology 385L
388LS. Experiments in Animal Models of Human Neurodegenerative Disease. NS, R One course. 
C-L: see Biology 422LS



 Neuroscience (NEUROSCI)596

390. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Instructor consent required to assure 
sufficient background knowledge. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Neuroscience Independent Scholarship 1: Advanced Topics. NS Readings, discussion, and 
synthesis of knowledge in a domain of special interest, under the supervision of a Neuroscience faculty member, 
through weekly meetings. Students produce a substantive, deliverable product by the end of the term that 
could be a written paper, a multimedia project, a website, an exhibition or performance, or some other original 
scholarly work that results from multiple iterations of draft, review, incorporation of feedback, and re-synthesis. 
Intended for students interested in exploring in depth specific topics not covered or only introduced in regularly 
available Neuroscience courses. Consent from the director of undergraduate studies is required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
392. Neuroscience Independent Scholarship 2: Advanced Topics. NS Second course, to follow 
Neuroscience 391, on readings, weekly discussion, and synthesis of knowledge in a domain of special interest, 
under the supervision of a Neuroscience faculty member. Students produce a substantive, deliverable product 
that could be a written paper, multimedia project, website, exhibition or performance, or some other original 
scholarly work that results from multiple iterations of draft, review, incorporation of feedback, and re-synthesis. 
Intended for students interested in exploring in depth specific topics not covered or only introduced in regularly 
available Neuroscience courses. Consent of the director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: 
Neuroscience 391. Instructor: Staff. One course.
413. Language and Aging. NS, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 413
421S. Biology of Nervous System Diseases. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 421S; also C-L: Psychology 
477S
425S. Auditory Neuroscience - From Sound to Music. NS An exploration of how sound is processed in 
brain, providing an introduction to stages of information processing from ears to auditory cortex and beyond. 
Methods of data acquisition (e.g., fMRI, electrophysiology, psychoacoustics) are introduced along with their 
advantages and pitfalls. Sound and auditory perception are discussed, starting with basic properties such as 
frequency, loudness, pitch, and timbre, progressing to human speech and music. A textbook, primary research 
papers and scholarly reviews are assigned. An interest in all forms of sound and music and completion of 
Neuroscience 201 or Neuroscience 212 are strongly recommended. Instructor: Overath. One course. C-L: Music 
425S, Psychology 479S
427S. Current Topics in Sensory Biology. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 427S
438AS. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 473AS; also C-L: 
Russian 438AS
439S. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 473S; also C-L: 
Russian 439S, Science & Society 439S
444S. Neuroscience Service Learning: Brain Connections. NS, SS, STS Learn major scientific 
discoveries and technological advances in psychology, biology, and neurology that shaped contemporary 
neuroscience and society. Discuss early and recent works ranging from popular media to scientific journals 
online and in-class. Improve written communication through self-reflection and weekly feedback from 
instructor and peers. Develop and assess neuroscience demonstrations in team environment for engaging 
local communities. Prerequisites: strong competency in foundational knowledge of neuroscience—successful 
completion of Neuroscience 101 and TWO of the following core courses: Neuroscience 201, 211, 212 or 223 
(concurrent enrollment in 2nd core course acceptable). Instructor: Ng. One course. C-L: Psychology 444S
450. Second Language Acquisition and Research. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 497; also 
C-L: Romance Studies 450
451S. Autobiographical Memory. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Psychology 451S
461S. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 461S
462S. Neuroscience Applications for Everyday Decision Making. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Psychology 462S



Neuroscience (NEUROSCI) 597

469S. Cognitive Control and the Prefrontral Cortex. NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Psychology 469S
470S. Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 470S
471S. Reward and Addiction. NS, W One course. C-L: see Psychology 471S; also C-L: Pharmacology and 
Cancer Biology 471S
478S. Motivation, Action, Choice: Neural and Behavioral Mechanisms. NS, W One course. C-L: see 
Psychology 478S
490S. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study 1. R First term of Research Independent Study in a subfield of 
neuroscience of special interest to a student, under the supervision of a faculty member. Concludes with 
submission of a substantive written report containing background, methods, and significant analysis and 
interpretation of data. Meets general requirement of a curriculum Research (R) course. Open to students 
after completion of 2 NEUROSCI courses; pre-approval of project by supervising faculty and Director of 
Undergraduate Studies in Neuroscience required. May be repeated with new faculty mentor or continued in 
NEUROSCI 494. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study 2. R Second term of Research Independent Study in a subfield of 
neuroscience of special interest to a student, under the supervision of a faculty member. Concludes with 
submission of a substantive written report containing background, methods, and significant analysis and 
interpretation of data. Meets general requirement of a curriculum Research (R) course. Open to students 
continuing same project as for NEUROSCI 493; pre-approval of project by supervising faculty and Director of 
Undergraduate Studies in Neuroscience required. May be repeated with new faculty mentor or continued in 
NEUROSCI 495. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Research Independent Study 3. R Third term of Research Independent Study in a subfield of 
neuroscience of special interest to a student, under the supervision of a faculty member. Concludes with 
submission of a substantive written report containing background, methods, and significant analysis and 
interpretation of data. Meets general requirement of a curriculum Research (R) course. Open to students 
continuing same project as for Neuroscience 493-494; pre-approval of project by supervising faculty and 
Director of Undergraduate Studies in Neuroscience required. May be repeated with new faculty mentor or 
continued in Neuroscience 496. Instructor: Staff. One course.
496. Research Independent Study 4. R Fourth term of Research Independent Study in a subfield of 
neuroscience of special interest to a student, under the supervision of a faculty member. Concludes with 
submission of a substantive written report containing background, methods, and significant analysis and 
interpretation of data. Meets general requirement of a curriculum Research (R) course. Open to students 
continuing same project as for Neuroscience 493-495; pre-approval of project by supervising faculty and 
Director of Undergraduate Studies in Neuroscience required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
499. Current Research in Neuroscience. EI, NS, R, W A formal component of the Graduation with 
Distinction in Neuroscience plan that includes review of directed reading and research in both theoretical and 
experimental neuroscience. Emphasis on the development of the ability to critically evaluate empirical research 
and to construct mathematical or deductive/inductive models. Final project includes preparation of a formal 
research proposal and a review of the role of ethics in science. Enrollment in an independent study and consent 
of instructor required. Along with research and thesis, required for Graduation with Distinction in Neuroscience. 
Instructor: Meck, LaBar, or Yin. One course. C-L: Psychology 499
500S. The Cinematic Depiction of Psychopathology. ALP, NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 500S
501S. Cognitive and Neurolinguistics. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 501; also C-L: Russian 
510
502. Neural Signal Acquisition (GE, IM, EL). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 502
503. Computational Neuroengineering (GE, EL). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 503
504. Fundamentals of Electrical Stimulation of the Nervous System (GE, EL). One course. C-L: see 
Biomedical Engineering 504
507. Neuronal Control of Movement (GE, EL). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 517



 Neuroscience (NEUROSCI)598

510. Brain and Language. NS, R One course. C-L: see Linguistics 510; also C-L: Psychology 575
511L. Intermediate Bioelectricity (GE, EL). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 511L
513. Introduction to Neurodynamics (GE, EL). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 513
515. Neural Prosthetic Systems (GE, EL, IM). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 515
533. Essentials of Pharmacology and Toxicology. One course. C-L: see Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 
533; also C-L: Molecular Cancer Biology 533
555S. Topics in Philosophy of Mind. CZ, R, STS, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 555S
560. Molecular Basis of Membrane Transport (GE, EL, MC). One course. C-L: see Biomedical 
Engineering 560
567. Theoretical Neuroscience. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Physics 567
584S. Hormones, Brain, and Cognition. NS, R One course. C-L: see Psychology 684S
590. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Neuroscience. Topics vary by semester. Undergraduate as well as Graduate/ 
Professional students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
595. Language, Music and Dementia: Neuroscience Approaches. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Linguistics 595; also C-L: Music 595
685S. Biological Pathways to Psychopathology. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 685S
686S. Principles of Neuroimmunology. NS One course. C-L: see Psychology 686S

The Major

For the BS Degree
Requirements. Ten courses in major (eight of ten courses must be 200-level or higher; one or more must 

be laboratory and methods; one or more must be a seminar at the 350 level or higher).
Corequisites. Foundational coursework is required in the disciplines of biology, chemistry, computer 

science, mathematics, and physics that may be completed concurrently with courses in the major. In biology, 
one of the gateway courses, Biology 201L (Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology) or Biology 202L (Gateway to 
Biology: Evolution & Genetics) or Biology 203L (Gateway to Biology: Molecular Biology, Genetics & Evolution) 
or its equivalent, will satisfy the corequisite. A score of 4 or 5 on the College Board Advance Placement Test 
in Biology can also be used to satisfy this corequisite. In chemistry, one general chemistry course-Chemistry 
101DL (Core Concepts in Chemistry) or Chemistry 110DL (Honors Chemistry: Core Concepts in Context)-
or equivalent, will satisfy the corequisite for the neuroscience major. A score of 4 or 5 on the College Board 
Advance Placement Test in Chemistry can also be used to satisfy this requirement. For Computer Science, one 
of the following courses (or its equivalent) will fulfill the corequisite: Neuroscience 103L (Computing and the 
Brain), Computer Science 101 (Program Design and Analysis I), Engineering 103L (Computational Methods in 
Engineering), or the equivalent. A score of 4 or 5 on the College Board Advance Placement Test in Computer 
Science A or Computer Science Principles can also be used to satisfy this corequisite. For mathematics, two terms 
of calculus or equivalent are required for the BS degree. The first semester calculus requirement can be satisfied 
by Mathematics 21 (Introductory Calculus I) or Mathematics 111L (Laboratory Calculus I) or Mathematics 121 
(Introductory Calculus I), or Mathematics 105L (Laboratory Calculus and Functions I) and Mathematics 106L 
(Laboratory Calculus and Functions II). A score of 5 on the College Board Advanced Placement Test in Calculus 
AB or a 4 or better in Calculus BC suffices for the first term of calculus. The second semester calculus requirement 
can be satisfied by: Mathematics 22 (Introductory Calculus II) or Mathematics 112L (Laboratory Calculus II) or 
Mathematics 122 (Introductory Calculus II) or Mathematics 122L (Introductory Calculus II with Applications). 
A score of 4 or 5 on the College Board Advanced Placement Test in Calculus BC fulfills the corequisite for both 
terms of calculus. In physics, two terms of algebra- or calculus-based physics are required, which may be satisfied 
by one of the following three sequences or their equivalent: Physics 141L (General Physics I) followed by Physics 
142L (General Physics II), or Physics 151L (Introductory Mechanics) followed by Physics 152L (Introductory 
Electricity, Magnetism, and Optics), or Physics 161L (Introductory Experimental Physics I), followed by Physics 



Neuroscience (NEUROSCI) 599

162L (Introductory Experimental Physics II). A score of 4 or 5 on the College Board Advanced Placement Tests for 
each component of the pair of yearlong Advanced Placement physics courses (AP Physics 1: Algebra-Based and 
AP Physics 2: Algebra-Based, or Physics C: Mechanics and Physics and Physics C: Electricity and Magnetism) will 
fulfill this corequisite in its entirety. A score of 4 or 5 on just one of these Advanced Placements tests will satisfy 
just the corresponding term of physics (first term: AP Physics 1: Algebra-Based or Physics C: Mechanics; second 
term: AP Physics 2: Algebra-Based or Physics C: Electricity and Magnetism).

Gateway Course. Neuroscience 101/102 (Biological Basis of Behavior: Introduction and Survey) is the 
gateway to the major.

Core Courses (two courses required). There are two core courses in the major in neuroscience that reflect 
different levels of inquiry described above: Neuroscience 223 (Cellular and Molecular Neurobiology), which 
focuses on cellular processes and synaptic mechanisms of neural signaling; and Neuroscience 212 (Introduction 
to Cognitive Neuroscience), which focuses on cognition and the brain basis of behavior. Neuroscience 223 and 212 
may be taken in any order.

Methods Courses (one course required). Neuroscience majors are required to understand the methods 
of scientific inquiry for investigating the structure and function of the nervous system. Any one of the following 
courses will satisfy this curricular requirement: Neuroscience 103L (Computing and the Brain), Neuroscience 
301L (Bioelectricity), Neuroscience 376 (Contemporary Neuroscience Methods), Neuroscience 378L (Perception 
and the Brain), Neuroscience 379L (Comparative Neuroanatomy), Neuroscience 380L (Functional Anatomy of the 
Human Brain), Neuroscience 381LA (Sensory Physiology and Behavior of Marine Animals), Neuroscience 382L 
(Functional Neuroimaging), Neuroscience 383L (Brain Waves and Cognition), Neuroscience 385L (Integrative 
Neuroscience Laboratory), Neuroscience 502 (Neural Signal Acquisition), Neuroscience 503 (Computational 
Neuroengineering), Neuroscience 511L (Intermediate Bioelectricity), or Neuroscience 515 (Neural Prosthetic 
Systems).

Statistics (one course required). Neuroscience majors are required to acquire competency in the elements 
of statistical design and practice that support the analysis and interpretation of neuroscientific data. Any one 
of the following courses will satisfy this curricular requirement: Statistical Science 101 (Data Analysis and 
Statistical Inference), Statistical Science 102 (Introductory Biostatistics), Statistical Science 104 (Data Analysis 
and Statistical Inference - Online), Statistical Science 110FS (Focus Program - Introductory Special Topics in 
Statistics), Statistical Science 111 (Probability and Statistical Inference), Statistical Science 130 (Probability 
and Statistics in Engineering), Statistical Science 230 (Probability), Psychology 201 (Introduction to Statistical 
Methods in Psychology), or Biology 304 (Biological Data Analysis).

Electives (five courses required). Neuroscience majors are required to explore the breadth and depth of 
the field by fulfilling five course requirements in neuroscience, with no more than two electives at the 100 level 
or below and at least one elective being a seminar course (350S or above). No more than one elective may count 
from a set of neuroscience courses that explore the intersection of the brain sciences and other disciplines (e.g., 
Neuroscience 289 (Music and the Brain); see website for complete list of intersection courses). Seminar, small-
lecture, and laboratory elective offerings are drawn from a dynamic list of approximately fifty courses that are 
offered by multiple departments in Trinity College, as well as departments in the School of Medicine and the Pratt 
School of Engineering. See the Psychology and Neuroscience website for the current list of elective offerings.

For the BS2 Degree for BME Majors in the Pratt School of Engineering
Requirements. Corequisites as above for the BS degree and ten courses in major (eight of ten courses 

must be 200-level or higher, one or more courses must be laboratory or methods; one or more courses must be 
from 350-level or higher seminars). All of the requirements for the BS degree listed above must be met with the 
following changes; Biomedical Engineering 301L/Neuroscience 301L (Bioelectricity) is required, in addition to 
the gateway and core courses and a course in statistics. Of the five additional neuroscience electives, no more than 
two electives may be cross-listed between neuroscience and biomedical engineering.

For the AB Degree
Requirements. Ten courses in major (eight of ten courses must be 200-level or higher, one or more 

courses must be laboratory or methods; one or more courses must be intersection; one or more courses must be 
from 350-level or higher seminars).

Corequisites. Foundational coursework is required in the disciplines of biology, chemistry, mathematics, 
and physics that may be completed concurrently with courses in the major for completion of the AB degree. For 
these disciplines, the same guidelines detailed above for the BS degree apply to the AB degree, with the following 
exceptions: there is no corequisite in Computer Science for the AB major in neuroscience, and in Mathematics, 

https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/


 Neuroscience (NEUROSCI)600

the equivalent of just one term of calculus is required (Mathematics 21 or 111L or 121, or 105L and 106L). A score 
of 5 on the College Board Advanced Placement Test in Calculus AB or a 4 or better on the Calculus BC test fulfills 
this corequisite.

Gateway, Core, and Methods Courses. Same as for the BS degree.
Statistics. Same as for the BS degree.
Electives (five courses required). Neuroscience majors are required to explore the breadth and depth of 

the field by fulfilling five course requirements in neuroscience, with at least one elective being a seminar at the 
350 level or higher. Furthermore, for the AB degree, students must complete an intersection course that explores 
the broader impact of neuroscience on society or the dialogue between the brain sciences and other disciplines, 
as listed on the program website (e.g., Neuroscience 267 (Neuroethics)). To complete the elective requirements 
for the AB degree, students may choose from a variety of seminar, small lecture, and laboratory offerings that are 
drawn from a dynamic list of more than fifty courses offered by multiple departments in Trinity College, as well as 
departments in the School of Medicine and the Pratt School of Engineering. See the Psychology and Neuroscience 
website for the current list of elective offerings.

For both BS and AB degree plans, no more than two of the ten courses required for the major may be used 
to satisfy the requirements of another major, minor, or certificate.

Graduation with Distinction in Neuroscience
Neuroscience majors with a GPA of 3.5 or above in neuroscience courses (not including corequisites), may 

apply for Graduation with Distinction in neuroscience. They must also maintain at least this level of performance 
throughout the remainder of their neuroscience studies at Duke. Candidates for distinction will conduct and 
complete an original research project carried out as a two-term research independent study in neuroscience. A 
substantial paper (thesis), usually based on empirical research and written in publication style, and a scientific 
poster are required. In addition, an oral defense of the thesis will be evaluated by a committee comprising three 
members. One member of the committee (either the research mentor or one of the two additional committee 
members) must be a neuroscience faculty member from an Arts and Sciences department or be a faculty member 
who teaches regularly in undergraduate neuroscience. One member of the committee can be a postdoctoral 
fellow or an advanced graduate student who has completed her/his/their preliminary exam. The director(s) of 
undergraduate studies and the associate director (if applicable) are available as committee members and should 
be consulted if there is a question about committee membership.

Either following completion of the two-terms of independent study or, more commonly, concurrent with 
completion of the second-term of independent study, students aspiring to earn Graduation with Distinction in 
neuroscience will take Neuroscience 499 (Current Research in Neuroscience). This spring-term course includes 
review of directed reading and research in both theoretical and experimental neuroscience, as well as discussion 
of the students’ independent study projects. Emphasis is placed on the development of the ability to critically 
evaluate empirical research and to construct mathematical or deductive/inductive models. The final project in 
this course includes preparation of a formal research proposal and a review of the role of ethics in science.

Evaluation of the student for distinction is based on the written thesis, an oral poster presentation and the 
oral examination before the distinction committee. The distinction committee will then decide whether the overall 
performance of the candidate qualifies for Graduation with Distinction in neuroscience (only one distinction 
level is recognized). Finally, Graduation with Distinction in neuroscience research projects will be presented as 
scientific posters in April during an undergraduate research forum.

The Minor
Requirements for Students in Trinity College of Arts & Sciences: Five neuroscience courses
The minor in neuroscience for students in Trinity College requires a minimum of five neuroscience courses 

from gateway, core, and elective course offerings. Four of the courses must be 200-level or higher and at least two 
courses must be from the core or gateway offerings. 

No more than two of the five courses required for the minor may be used to satisfy the requirements of 
another major, minor, or certificate.

Requirements for Biomedical Engineering Majors in the Pratt School: Five neuroscience courses
The minor in neuroscience for biomedical engineering majors in the Pratt School requires a minimum of 

five neuroscience courses from gateway, core, and elective course offerings. Neuroscience 101/102 (Biological 

https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/
https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/


Nonlinear and Complex Systems (NCS) 601

Basis of Behavior: Introduction and Survey) is the gateway to the minor in neuroscience. Next, the biomedical 
engineering major will complete one of the core courses in neuroscience—Neuroscience 212 or 223. The biomedical 
engineering major is also required to complete Biomedical Engineering 301/Neuroscience 301 (Bioelectricity) for 
the minor in neuroscience. Finally, completion of the minor requires two neuroscience electives that are not cross-
listed in biomedical engineering.

Nonlinear and Complex Systems
The Center for Nonlinear and Complex Systems (CNCS) is an interdisciplinary organization at Duke that 

brings together researchers and teachers with interests in nonlinear dynamics, chaos, complex systems and related 
topics. The center provides an enrichment course, Nonlinear and Complex Systems 501, that encourages students 
to explore and learn about diverse aspects of the field, as applied broadly in science, engineering, mathematics, 
and social sciences. A large selection of other courses is also relevant to the center. Students should contact the 
director for additional information.

Courses in Nonlinear and Complex Systems (NCS)
501. Survey of Nonlinear and Complex Systems. NS Survey lectures by Duke experts active in CNCS 
research; regular attendance in the CNCS seminar series; and a weekly meeting to discuss the lectures and 
seminars. May be repeated once. Prerequisite: Physics 513. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Physics 501
513. Nonlinear Dynamics. NS, QS, R Introduction to the study of temporal patterns in nonequilibrium 
systems. Theoretical, computational, and experimental insights used to explain phase space, bifurcations, 
stability theory, universality, attractors, fractals, chaos, and time-series analysis. Each student carries out an 
individual research project on a topic in nonlinear dynamics and gives a formal presentation of the results. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 101, Mathematics 216, and Physics 161D, 162D, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Computer Science 524, Physics 513

Pathology
For courses in pathology, see Medicine (School)—Graduate (School) Basic Science Courses Open to 

Undergraduates on page 811. 

Pharmacology
For courses in pharmacology, see Medicine (School)—Graduate (School) Basic Science Courses Open to 

Undergraduates on page 811. 

Persian (Farsi)
For courses in Persian (Farsi), see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies on page 204.

Philosophy
Professor Janiak, Chair; Professor Sinnott-Armstrong, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Adler 
(Law, Economics, and Public Policy), Brading, Brandon, Conitzer (Computer Science and Economics), Farahany 
(Law and Science & Society), Ferejohn, Flanagan, Gillespie (Political Science), Grant (Political Science), Hoover, 
Janiak, McShea (Biology), Moi (English), Neander, Norman, Purves (Neurobiology), Rosenberg, Sinnott-Arm-
strong, Sreenivasan, and Wong; Visiting Professor van Inwagen; Associate Professors De Brigard and Pickford 
(German Studies); Assistant Professor Pavese; Professors Emeriti Buchanan, Golding, and Sanford; Associate 
Research Professor Hawkins

A major and a minor are available in this department.
The undergraduate program in the Department of Philosophy acquaints students with the content and 

the structure of philosophical theory in various areas. Classes encourage discussion so that students can engage 
actively in the philosophical examination of problems.



 Philosophy (PHIL)602

Course offerings fall into two general categories: the systematic and the historical. In a systematic treatment, 
the organization of a course reflects the problems presented by the subject matter of that course, as in logic, 
ethics, and metaphysics. Historical courses direct attention more to the order of development in the thought 
of a particular philosopher (Plato, Aristotle, Kant) or in a historical period. In all courses, reading of the works 
of philosophers acquaints the students with the important and influential contributions to the definition and 
solution of philosophical issues.

The problems raised in philosophy about various fields of the arts and sciences involve questions that 
these particular disciplines typically neglect. In the consideration of such problems, students will acquire 
some understanding and perspective of the major areas of the human intellectual endeavor. Philosophical 
comprehension is in this way an essential part of a complete education.

Philosophy provides a sound preparation for the demands of many professions. For example, precision of 
argument and broad acquaintance with intellectual traditions emphasized in philosophy form an excellent basis 
for the study of law.

Only one course from among Philosophy 101, 103S, and 104S may be taken for credit. These courses are not 
open to juniors and seniors. 

Courses in Philosophy (PHIL)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Philosophy. CZ, W Examination of problems in philosophy; emphasis on metaphysics 
and theory of knowledge. Open only to first years and sophomores. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Science & 
Society
103S. Introduction to Philosophy. CZ, W Philosophy 101 conducted as a seminar. Open only to first years 
and sophomores. Instructor: Staff. One course.
104S. Introduction to Philosophy. CZ, EI, W Philosophy 102 conducted as a seminar. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
110. Information, Society & Culture: Bass Connections Gateway. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 110; also C-L: Computer Science 110, Public Policy 110
123FS. Freedom and Responsibility. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Political Science 175FS; also C-L: 
Ethics Elective
124FS. Freedom and Moral Obligation. CZ, EI, W Are moral obligations limitations on our freedom, or 
are they, as some philosophers have insisted, the fullest expressions of our freedom? We’ll look at what moral 
obligations are and how we come to have them at all. We will then ask about the nature of moral motivation by 
considering altruism: giving to others with nothing expected in return. Finally, we will consider collective moral 
obligations. When a moral problem, like alleviating global poverty or remedying climate change, is solvable not 
by individual action, but by coordinated, collective action, does that morally obligate each of us individually? 
Only open to students in the Focus program. Department consent required. Instructor: Summers. One course. 
C-L: Political Science 195FS
150. Logic. CZ The conditions of effective thinking and clear communication. Examination of the basic 
principles of deductive reasoning. Instructor: Staff. One course.
155. Reason and Argument. W How to analyze, evaluate, and construct arguments of various kinds on a 
wide range of topics. Web-based lectures, exercises, and quizzes. Class meetings for discussion of short weekly 
writing with peer assessment. Instructor: Sinnott-Armstrong. One course.
163D. Ethics for Robertson Scholars. CZ, EI Robertson Scholars First-Year colloquium; Introduction to 
ethical reasoning & argument. Asks questions/examines concepts & arguments related to the nature of moral 
reasoning. Examines contemporary ethical issues to gain understanding of the kinds of reasons/arguments used 
to establish or support ethical claims. Restricted to Robertson scholars. Class meets half the semester at Duke, 
half at UNC, with weekly discussion sections on both campuses. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Philosophy. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Seminar: Topics in Philosophy. Topics vary each semester offered. Open only to 
students in the Focus program. Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Philosophy (PHIL) 603

194FS. Beyond Disagreement and Cozy Consensus. CCI, CZ, EI Part of the “Ethics, Leadership & 
Global Citizenship” Focus cluster. Introduction to tools and concepts in ethics, critical reasoning, politics, and 
psychology. Emphasis on identifying and framing the right questions about justice, democracy, identity, etc; 
then criticizing or justifying answers to such questions. Readings range from classics in the history of Western 
thought, to country and western music, and Kanye West. Open only to students in the Focus program. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Norman. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 194FS
201. History of Modern Philosophy. CCI, CZ Seventeenth and eighteenth century attempts to address 
philosophical problems concerning knowledge and the nature of reality in Descartes, Spinoza, Malebranche, 
Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, and Kant. Instructor: Janiak or staff. One course.
202. Aesthetics: The Philosophy of Art. ALP, CZ The concept of beauty, the work of art, the function of 
art, art and society, the analysis of a work of art, criticism in the arts. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 299
203. History of Ancient Philosophy. CCI, CZ The pre-Socratics, Socrates, Plato, Aristotle, and post-
Aristotelian systems. Not open to students who have taken Classical Studies 93 or Philosophy 93. Instructor: 
Ferejohn or staff. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 271
205. World Philosophy. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Course introduces students to several great philosophical 
traditions worthy of respect in their own right and important for understanding our contemporary world. 
Surveys, compares, contrasts philosophical thought from classical Greco-Roman world (Plato and Seneca), 
Middle Eastern and Africa traditions (including African American traditions), India (Hinduism, Buddhism, 
Jainism), and China (Confucianism and Daoism). These traditions, embodied in the modern world, try to 
answer questions like: Why are we here? Are we fated to live as we do? What is a good human life? Is there God 
or gods? Is there afterlife? How can we know what is true good? What is a person? How ought humans relate to 
nature? Instructor: Flanagan. One course.
207. Political and Social Philosophy. CZ, EI Basic ethical concepts involved in political organization 
and in a variety of periods, such as equality, human dignity and rights, source of political obligation, political 
education. Discussion of contemporary problems. Examination of contemporary viewpoints such as liberalism 
and feminism. Instructor: Wong or Sreenivasan. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
209. Philosophy of Language. CZ A philosophical analysis of problems arising in the study of language and 
symbolism. Topics include: theories of language, the nature of signs and symbols, theories of meaning, types of 
discourse (scientific, mathematical, poetic), definition, ambiguity, metaphor. Instructor: Pavese. One course. 
C-L: Linguistics 209
210. Knowledge and Certainty. CZ, R Problems in the theory of knowledge: conditions of knowledge, 
skepticism, perception, memory, induction, knowledge of other minds, and knowledge of necessary truths. 
Instructor: Ferejohn or Pavese. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
211. Appearance and Reality. CZ, R Problems in metaphysics: theories of existence, substance, universals, 
identity, space, time, causality, determinism and action, and the relation of mind and body. Instructor: Ferejohn 
or staff. One course.
212. Philosophy of Mind. CZ, R Such topics as mind and body, the nature of thought, perception, 
consciousness, personal identity, and other minds. The relevance of cognitive psychology, neuroscience, and 
computer science to the philosophy of mind. Instructor: De Brigard, Flanagan or Neander. One course. C-L: 
Linguistics 208, Visual and Media Studies 302, Information Science + Studies
215. Applied and Environmental Ethics. CZ, EI, STS A critical examination of ethical dimensions of 
several contemporary individual and political normative problems, including abortion, affirmative action, 
national and international economic redistribution, and the environmental impact of economic changes and 
political decisions. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 265, Marine Science and Conservation
216. Problems in Ethical Theory. CZ, EI The nature of morality, amoralism, utilitarianism, and 
deontology. Both historical and contemporary readings. Instructor: Flanagan or Wong. One course.
217. Introduction to Ethical Theory. CZ, EI Historically informed introduction to ethical theories in 
the Western tradition. Major historical figures (Aristotle, Kant, Mill) are read as well as some contemporary 
defenders of views inspired by these thinkers. This course is intended to provide a foundation for further study 



 Philosophy (PHIL)604

of ethics in philosophy. No prerequisites. Instructor: Hawkins. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
218. Medical Ethics. CZ, EI, STS Examination of ethical issues in the practice of medicine. Course examines 
the concepts of well-being, autonomy, health, and disease; the ethics of informed consent; problems of capacity 
assessment; ethics of making decisions for incompetent patients; ethical issues of advance directives; the ethics 
of legalizing assisted suicide and euthanasia. Course also looks at ethical dimensions of decision-making for 
particular vulnerable groups: elderly dementia patients, permanently unconscious patients, impaired newborns, 
people with various disabilities. The focus is on clinical medicine, but the course serves also as a foundation for 
further study in bioethics. Instructor: Hawkins. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective, Science & Society
219D. The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 101D; also 
C-L: Political Science 120D
220. Philosophical Perspectives on Disability. EI, SS Considers core questions about the nature of 
disability and what this entails for policy. Review of medical and social models of disability, and current 
philosophical attempts to improve on these models. Careful consideration of the relationship between disability 
and well-being, including questions about how much weight to give to different kinds of testimony about the 
quality of life of disabled people. Relates all of this to various topics in practical ethics. Instructor: Hawkins. One 
course.
221S. Philosophy and Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Explores what great literature and drama teach 
about mind, morals, and meaning of life. Examines how fiction, drama, and poetry speak truthfully about 
human condition though what they say may be literally false. Can literature answer questions like: What makes 
life worth living? Why be moral? Selections and films from, and based on the works of Sophocles, Aristotle, 
Shakespeare, Dostoevsky, Whitman, Camus, T.S. Eliot, Steinbeck, Sylvia Plath, Mary Gordon. Instructor: 
Flanagan or staff. One course.
222. Gender and Philosophy. CZ, EI Issues in political and moral philosophy in their bearing on feminist 
concerns, including political equality and rights, preferential treatment, feminist and nonfeminist critiques of 
pornography, and the morality of abortion. Instructor: Wong. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 222, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
222S. Gender and Philosophy. Seminar version of Philosophy 222. Instructor: Wong. One course. C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 222S
226. Philosophy of Sport. CZ, EI Play, sport, and game in western culture: sport and leisure, sport 
vs. athletics, discipline of the body, spectatorship, the amateur and the professional. Course deals with 
ethical context and implications of competition and the urge to win, with sport as rule-governed behavior. 
Also examines significance of infractions of the rules, associated penalites, and ethical issues like cheating, 
performance-enhancing substances in sport, concept of the “team” and ideals of individual performance. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
232A. The Cognitive Science of Religion and Morality. CZ, EI, R, W Review of recent theories of 
mind in cognitive science as they pertain to the nature of belief in God, religious practices, and moral attitudes. 
Arguments in ethics and philosophy of religion as they apply to Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. Offered only 
in the Duke in Istanbul semester study abroad programs. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 224A, Religion 281A, Turkish 232A
236A. The Birth of Reason in Ancient Greece. CCI, CZ, EI A study of the Classical Greeks’ pronounced 
emphasis on the rational aspect of human nature, which enabled them to lay the foundations for subsequent 
intellectual developments in western thought. The Athenian Empire as a case study for an investigation of the 
five major ancient ethical systems. Taught only in the Duke Greece Summer Study Abroad program. Instructor: 
Ferejohn. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 272A
237A. Political Philosophy of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Examination of the claim made for and 
against the expansion of free exchange on economic, political, and cultural institutions and conditions, from 
the perspectives of competing ethical theories and political philosophies. Taught only in the Duke in Geneva 
Summer Study Abroad program. Instructor: Rosenberg. One course. C-L: Political Science 297A, Public Policy 
204A, Economics 303A
242. Problems in Philosophy of Science. CZ, STS The principal philosophical problems of scientific 
practice. Explanation, confirmation, instrumentalist and realist conceptions of scientific theory. Laws and 



Philosophy (PHIL) 605

indeterminism in modern science. Instructors: Brandon, Janiak, or Rosenberg. One course.
242S. Problems in Philosophy of Science. CZ, STS The principal philosophical problems of scientific 
practice. Explanation, confirmation, instrumentalist and realist conceptions of scientific theory. Laws and 
indeterminism in modern science. Instructor: Brading, Brandon, Janiak, or Rosenberg. One course.
246. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
331; also C-L: Economics 361, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 331, Ethics Elective, 
Information Science + Studies, Human Rights
246D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 331D; 
also C-L: Economics 361D, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies
250. Symbolic Logic. CZ Detailed analysis of deduction and of deductive systems. Open to sophomores by 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Brandon or staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 250, Information Science + 
Studies
252. Philosophy and Neuroscience. SS Explores relevance of recent findings in neuroscience (and 
cognitive neuroscience) to traditional philosophical areas of inquiry. Also addresses philosophical issues 
regarding practice of neuroscience and relation to other disciplines/sciences. Possible topics include: 
epistemology of neuroscience data, relation between neuroscience/psychology, neurolinguistics, neuroethics, 
neural representations, neuroscience & consciousness. Instructors: De Brigard, Sinnott-Armstrong, or Neander. 
One course. C-L: Neuroscience 252
262. Human Rights in Theory and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
272; also C-L: Public Policy 231, International Comparative Studies 272, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 262, Documentary Studies, Ethics Elective, Global Health, Human Rights
263. Chinese Philosophy. CCI, CZ, EI The major schools of classical Chinese philosophy: Confucianism, 
Moism, and Taoism. Confucianism on the ideals of harmonious human life; Moism’s charge that Confucianism 
encourages an unjustified partiality toward the family; Taoism’s claim that no logically consistent set of 
doctrines can articulate the “Truth.” Debates and mutual influences among these philosophies. Comparisons 
between Chinese and Western cultures with respect to philosophical issues and solutions. Instructor: Wong. One 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 275, Ethics Elective
270. Business Ethics: The Debate Over Corporate Social Responsibility. EI, SS Debates about 
obligations of firms and business leaders over and above legal obligations. Examination of foundations and 
implications of corporate governance, corporate law, and the theory of the firm. Evaluation of challenges by 
supporters of stakeholder theory and corporate social responsibility. Instructor: Norman. One course. C-L: 
Study of Ethics 270, International Comparative Studies 271, Markets and Management Studies
274S. Love, Marriage, Education: Theories About Women from Rousseau to Beauvoir. ALP, 
CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 365S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 365S, English 388S
281. Global Bioethics. CZ, EI Examines various problems of international ethics, discussing them in the 
context of general ethical theory and then in the specific context of various controversies concerning the conduct 
of clinical trials in developing countries. Problems include moral universalism and relativism; poverty relief and 
international aid; international health disparities; human rights; and exploitation. Instructor: Sreenivasan. One 
course. C-L: Global Health 241, International Comparative Studies 282
282. Science, Ethics, & Democracy. EI, SS, STS Examines relationships between scientific knowledge, 
ethics, & formation of public policies in a democratic society. Science influences public policy & public policy 
shapes scientific enterprise. How can citizens reliably identify genuine scientific expertise? If scientific expertise 
conflicts with religious views of some citizens, can public policy rely on scientific expertise without violating 
principles of religious toleration? What are ethical rules of public deliberation—must citizens appeal only 
to reasons accessible from secular viewpoints? To what extent should science goals be shaped by scientific 
community versus democratic processes? Instructor: Buchanan. One course. C-L: Bioethics and Science Policy 
282
285. Existentialism. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 285; also C-L: English 285
286. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see German 380; also C-L: Literature 280, 
Political Science 378, Marxism and Society



 Philosophy (PHIL)606

286D. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see German 380D; also C-L: Literature 
280D, Political Science 378D
290. Special Topics in Philosophy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Seminars in Philosophy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual reading in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of 
a previously approved topic. Open only to highly qualified students in the junior and senior year with consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing a significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to highly qualified students in the junior 
and senior year with consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
312S. Adam Smith and the System of Natural Liberty. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Economics 312S; 
also C-L: History 308S
314. Philosophy of Biology. CZ, NS, R, STS An introduction to conceptual and methodological issues 
raised in contemporary biology, including reductionism, the meaning of chance, laws in biology, the units of 
natural selection, teleology, and the structure of evolutionary theory. Recommended prerequisite: AP biology or 
introductory biology. Instructors: Brandon and/or McShea. One course. C-L: Biology 255, Marine Science and 
Conservation, Science & Society
317. Aristotle. CZ, EI Survey of principal topics in Aristotelian philosophy. Areas of study include 
metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of science, philosophy of language, ethics, and political philosophy. 
Instructor: Ferejohn. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 371
331. Kant. CZ, W Immanuel Kant’s philosophy, its background and influence. His early work in metaphysics 
and ethics and his mature philosophy of the ‘Critical Period’ in which he wrote The Critique of Pure Reason, The 
Critique of Practical Reason, and The Critique of Judgment. Recommended prerequisite or corequisite: 
Philosophy 201. Instructor: Janiak. One course.
331T. Voices in Philosophy: German. Discussion-based course trains students with advanced intermediate 
proficiency in German to read and analyze core philosophical texts in German, typically in conjunction 
with a lecture course offered in philosophy. Classes include close readings of original texts, discussions of 
interpretation and application in variety of other forms (including film, documentary, multimedia) and real-
life situations. Students examine how language/culture impact our understanding of core philosophical texts 
through attention to issues such as translation, vernacular, and word choice. Tutorials meet weekly for 75 
minutes. Recommended prerequisite: German 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: German 
331T
335. Moral Psychology. CZ, EI, SS Considers core questions about the proper role of empirical psychology 
in developing and/or confirming or disconfirming moral theories. Review of contemporary debates about the 
nature of moral motivation, the role of emotion in moral judgment, the nature of virtues and whether they exist, 
the nature of agency and moral responsibility, the nature and importance of happiness, and the role of intuitions 
in developing moral theories. Prerequisite: previous course in moral theory. Instructor: Hawkins. One course.
345. The Philosophy and Methodology of Economics. EI, SS, W Introduction to conceptual and 
methodological issues raised in modern economics. Topics may include choice, rationality and irrationality, 
realism, models, the relationship between microeconomics and macroeconomics, prediction and explanation, 
value judgments and policymaking, and causality. Case studies of applications to economic problems. 
Prerequisites: One course in economics or consent of instructor. Instructor: Hoover or Rosenberg. One course. 
C-L: Economics 319
350. Logic and Its Applications. One course. C-L: see Mathematics 388; also C-L: Computer Science 288
353. Neuroethics. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 267; also C-L: Psychology 278, Study 
of Ethics 269
355S. Visual Perception and the Brain. NS, W One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 355S; also C-L: 
Psychology 355S



Philosophy (PHIL) 607

380S. The Scientific Revolution. CZ, STS, W Study emergence of modern physical sciences as leading 
means for understanding the natural world; read primary documents from Copernicus, Kepler, Galileo, 
Descartes, Boyle, Hooke and Newton; learn how past science shaped the modern world; learn how history 
of science enables understanding of 21st-century science. Instructor: Janiak. One course. C-L: History 388S, 
Science & Society 380S
384AS. Classical and Contemporary Political Theory. EI, SS Examines crucial debates in classical and 
contemporary political thought, especially question of individual freedom, from end of English Civil War to 
present day. Equips students with theoretical expertise to make persuasive arguments of their own. Not open to 
students who have taken Philosophy 207, Political Science 223, or Political Science 224. If you take this course 
you cannot get credit for Philosophy 207, Political Science 223, or Political Science 224. Open only to students 
in the Duke in Oxford program. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Stears. Two courses. C-L: Political 
Science 377AS
385AS. Science, Ethics, and Society. CZ, EI Major recent public debates involving science, ethics, and 
policy in Britain and the United States. Exploration of issues ranging from stem cell research and global 
warming to health care policy and the teaching of evolution, as differently framed in the two countries. 
Examination of scientific, philosophical, and theological dimensions of such controversies, and how their 
manifestations in the public realm illuminate the relationships between scientists and laypersons, academic and 
popular culture, and public attitudes toward government and regulation. Open only to students in the Duke in 
Oxford program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Two courses. C-L: Religion 282AS, Public Policy 
258AS
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Philosophy. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
411. Philosophy of Time & Space. CZ Topics include: the possibility of time travel, the direction of time, 
comparisons between space and time, special relativity, and existence of the past and future. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
447. Philosophical and Conceptual Problems of Entrepreneurship. SS Investigation of the nature of 
entrepreneurship; its psychological foundations, relation to science and technology, implications for economics, 
and ramifications for morality and ethics. Instructors: Rosenberg/Fjeld. One course. C-L: Economics 346, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship 447
463S. Eastern & Western Conceptions of Human Nature, Ethics, & Politics. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Course 
deals with differences of value by understanding a variety of traditions. Explores conceptions of human nature 
and how these connect with views about the good human life, duties, responsibilities, rights, and proper forms 
of political governance. International team leads discussions from comparative and cross-cultural perspectives. 
Critically examines Western sources, Chinese/Korean sources, Hindu, Buddhist, and Jain sources- analyzing 
how these ideas shape contemporary Western/East Asian/South Asian culture. All in context of contemporary 
scientific sources on human nature from psychology, anthropology, and primatology. Instructor: Flanagan. One 
course.
465. Politics, Philosophy, and Economics Capstone. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 449; 
also C-L: Economics 389
486S. Ordinary Language Philosophy. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 486S; also C-L: English 485S
490S. Seminars in Philosophy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Distinction Seminar Program. Original research project culminating in a 40-60 page thesis. Covers 
philosophy-specific research techniques as well as fundamentals of academic bibliographic research. Students 
share their research and receive/provide feedback. Instructor Consent Required. Instructor: staff. Half course.
502S. Comparative Ethics. CCI, CZ, EI Chinese and Western ethics compared, including conceptions of 
the virtues, the good life, right action, and the person. Instructor permission required. Instructor: Wong. One 
course.
503S. Contemporary Ethical Theories. CZ, EI, SS The nature and justification of basic ethical concepts 
in the light of the chief ethical theories of twentieth-century British and American philosophers. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Flanagan, Sreenivasan, or Wong. One course. C-L: Political Science 582S, 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies



 Philosophy (PHIL)608

506S. Responsibility. CZ, EI The relationship between responsibility in the law and moral blameworthiness; 
excuses and defenses; the roles of such concepts as act, intention, motive, ignorance, and causation. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
508S. Political Values. CZ, EI Analysis of the systematic justification of political principles and the political 
values in the administration of law. Instructor: Norman or Sreenivasan. One course.
510S. Adversarial Ethics. EI, SS Course attempts to identify general principles for designing the rules & 
regulations for deliberately adversarial institutions (ie; markets, electoral systems/legislatures, criminal law, 
warfare, sports). Looks at the special virtues of sportsmanship, professionalism, business ethics, etc. people are 
expected to follow within these hyper-competitive contexts. By examining ways the criteria for being an ethical 
businessperson, lawyer, soldier, and so on may differ from the criteria for simply being an “ethical person”, this 
course seeks to prepare students for future professional roles in these adversarial domains. No formal pre-
requisites. Instructor: Norman. One course. C-L: Political Science 585S, Study of Ethics 510S
511S. Plato. CZ Selected dialogues. Instructor: Ferejohn. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 572S
512S. Aristotle. CZ Selected topics. Instructor: Ferejohn. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 573S
536S. Hegel’s Political Philosophy. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 676S; also C-L: 
German 575S
537S. Nietzsche’s Political Philosophy. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 577S; also C-L: 
German 576S
538S. Problems in the Philosophy and Policy of Genomics. CZ, R, STS, W An examination of 
normative, methodological, and metaphysical issues raised by molecular biology, and its relations to other 
components of biology, including human behavior. Instructor: Rosenberg. One course. C-L: Information Science 
+ Studies
539S. Race Theory: Biological Classification and Moral Implications. CZ, EI Topics to include: 
Biological classification theory and its applications to humans; The fit, or lack thereof, of biological categories 
and folk classifications of race; The historical/political motivations behind human racial classifications; The role 
of race in moral interactions; and The role of race in the construction of personal identity. Instructor: Brandon. 
One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 580S
541S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science. CZ, STS An integrated introduction to 
the nature of science and scientific change, and its impact on society. Counts as elective for the Science & Society 
Certificate Program. Instructor: Brading, Janiak, or Rosenberg. One course. C-L: Literature 521S, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 541S, History 577S, Science & Society
550SL. Digital Publishing: Concepts and Practice. CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science 
+ Studies 550SL
551S. Epistemology. CZ, R Selected topics in the theory of knowledge; for example, conditions of knowledge, 
skepticism and certainty, perception, memory, knowledge of other minds, and knowledge of necessary truths. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
552S. Metaphysics. CZ, R Selected topics: substance, qualities and universals, identity, space, time, 
causation, and determinism. Instructor: Staff. One course.
555S. Topics in Philosophy of Mind. CZ, R, STS, W One or more topics such as mental causation, animal 
minds, artificial intelligence, and foundations of cognitive science. Includes relevant literature from fields 
outside philosophy (for example, psychology, neuroscience, ethology, computer science, cognitive science). 
Instructor: De Brigard or Neander. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 555S
559. The Biological Basis of Music. One course. C-L: see Neurobiology 559; also C-L: Psychology 580
566S. Topics in Early Modern Political Thought from Machiavelli to Mills. CCI, R, SS One course. 
C-L: see Political Science 579S
570. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America. 
ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 670; also C-L: Literature 623, Science & 
Society



Philosophy (PHIL) 609

572. Frankfurt School Critical Theory. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 570; also C-L: Political 
Science 570
573S. Heidegger. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 581S
584S. Modern Political Theory. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 584S; also C-L: Ethics 
Elective
590. Special Topics in Philosophy Lecture. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Fields of Philosophy Seminar (Topics). Instructor: Staff. One course.
618S. Medieval Philosophy. CCI, CZ, R Study of Augustine against background of late ancient Roman 
philosophy, and Thomas Aquinas and others against background of medieval Muslim philosophy, in particular 
Avicenna and Averroes, and Neoplatonism. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 669S
625S. British Empiricism. CZ A critical study of the writings of Locke, Berkeley, or Hume with special 
emphasis on problems in the theory of knowledge. Instructor: Janiak. One course.
627S. Continental Rationalism. CZ A critical study of the writings of Descartes, Spinoza, or Leibniz with 
special emphasis on problems in the theory of knowledge and metaphysics. Instructor: Janiak. One course.
628S. Recent and Contemporary Philosophy. CZ A critical study of some contemporary movements, with 
special emphasis on analytic philosophers. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 528S
629S. Topics in the History of Philosophy. CZ Topics in one or more periods in the history of philosophy 
(for example, ancient, medieval, or modern) such as skepticism, mind-body relations, the nature of persons 
and personal identity, the relation between physics and metaphysics, causation and explanation. Instructor: 
Flanagan, Ferejohn, Janiak, or Rosenberg. One course.
631S. Kant’s Critique of Pure Reason. CZ Instructor: Janiak. One course.
633S. Methodology of the Empirical Sciences. CZ, STS Recent philosophical discussion of the concept of 
a scientific explanation, the nature of laws, theory and observation, probability and induction, and other topics. 
Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Brandon or Rosenberg. One course.
634S. Problems in the Philosophy of Biology. NS, STS Selected topics, with emphasis on evolutionary 
biology: the structure of evolutionary theory, adaptation, teleological or teleonomic explanations in biology, 
reductionism and organicism, the units of selection, and sociobiology. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Brandon, Neander, or Rosenberg. One course. C-L: Biology 555S
640S. Philosophical Psychology. CZ A study of recent work on the nature of the self and the nature and 
function of consciousness. Work from philosophy, psychology, cognitive neuroscience, and evolutionary biology 
will be discussed. Instructor: Flanagan or Neander. One course.
650S. Topics in Formal Philosophy. Topics selected from formal logic, philosophy of mathematics, 
philosophy of logic, or philosophy of language. Instructor: Staff. One course.
678S. Pragmatism. CZ A study of the philosophical school of American Pragmatism. Involves close reading, 
discussion, and analysis of the major pragmatist philosophers of the late 19th and early 20th centuries, including 
Peirce, James, and Dewey, as well as more recent pragmatists, such as Rorty. Topics include pragmatic analyses 
of belief, action, will, and experience and their applications to human inquiry, scientific method, ethics, and 
political philosophy. Instructor: Hoover. One course.
681S. Wittgensteinian Perspectives on Literary Theory. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 681S; also 
C-L: English 582S
692S. Bioethics. EI Course offers a graduate-level intro to bioethics. Topics include the history of bioethics; 
research ethics; limit setting in health care; and reproductive ethics. Course primarily intended for seniors and 
graduate students. Instructor: Hawkins or Sreenivasan. One course.
693S. Causation. A study of the philosophical foundations of causation. Involves close reading and discussion 
of classic modern philosophical analyses of causation, with special reference to applications in the philosophy of 
science including the social sciences. Instructor: Hoover. One course.



 Philosophy (PHIL)610

The Major
Requirements. Ten courses in philosophy, eight of which must be at the 200 level or above. The courses 

must include Philosophy 201 and 203; a course at the 200 level or above in value theory (for example, ethics, 
political philosophy); a course at the 200 level or above in metaphysics, epistemology, philosophy of mind, or 
philosophy of science; a course in logic (Philosophy 150, 250, or 350); and at least one seminar at the 500-600 
level.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers work leading to Graduation with Distinction. See the section on honors in this 

bulletin. 

The Minor
Requirements. At least five courses, no more than two of which may be below the 200 level. No specific 

courses are required. All students who wish to pursue a minor are encouraged to seek advice from faculty members 
in the department. 

Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
Professor Munger, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The interdisciplinary Philosophy, Politics, and Economics Program at Duke is designed to enable students 

to secure an understanding of the common foundations and the intersection of methods employed in normative 
inquiry by the three disciplines that make up the program. Political philosophy and political economy face 
similar questions and exploit common resources, and the alternative answers they provide to these questions 
are grounded in competing philosophical theories. Students intending to major in any of the three disciplines, 
or for that matter in any other discipline with an impact on public institutions and civil society, national, and 
international governance, and economic development, will find the certificate’s program of studies valuable. 

The certificate in the Philosophy, Politics, and Economics Program is composed of six courses, including 
two cross-listed courses, one that functions as a gateway to the certificate program, a second that figures as its 
capstone, and four other classes in economics, philosophy, and political science.

Program Preparation
Preparation for participation in the gateway course should normally include the following prerequisites: 

a) Economics 101 (Economic Principles), and b) Philosophy 207 (Political and Social Philosophy), or Political 
Science 175 (Introduction to Political Philosophy). However, students without this previous preparation may 
enroll in the gateway course with the permission of the instructor.

Program Requirements
Six specified courses distributed across the three disciplines, including gateway and capstone courses.

Gateway Course
All students in the certificate program must take the Philosophy, Politics, and Economics introductory 

course: 
Political Science 331 (Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice) (C-L: Economics 361, Philosophy 246)

Capstone Course
In their senior year students must take the Philosophy, Politics, and Economics capstone course:
Political Science 449 (C-L: Economics 389, Philosophy 465)

Core Courses
Beyond the gateway course, and prior to or concurrent with the capstone course, students must take a 

common core of selected sequence of four courses in microeconomics, rational choice, ethical theory/political 



Health, Wellness, and Physical Education (PHYSEDU)  611

philosophy, and the history of economic thought. The four courses will be chosen from three groups: This sequence 
will be selected in consultation with the program director, and must be approved for each student separately. 
The four courses must include one course from each of the three core disciplines of the certificate—philosophy, 
politics, and economics—as well as one additional course that will reflect the interests of the student and will be 
chosen with an eye toward facilitating completion of the major paper in the capstone class.

Health, Wellness, and Physical Education
Associate Professor of the Practice Yakola, Chair; Lecturing Fellow McNally, Director of Undergraduate Studies; 
Assistant Clinical Professor Alphin; Professor of the Practice Dale; Professor Emeritus LeBar; Assistant Professor 
of the Practice Hampton; Instructors Bar, Beguinet, Brame, Branson, Douglas, Finnegan, Kaufmann, King, Lee, 
Miller, Moore, Shamp, Silar, and Welsh

Activity courses in the program of health, wellness, and physical education do not count toward distributional 
requirements. 

Courses in Health, Wellness, and Physical Education (PHYSEDU) 

Activity Courses
Each activity course listed below carries a 0.5 course credit and is given on a Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory 

basis. The maximum amount of credit that counts for the undergraduate degree is 1.0 course credit, but additional 
courses may be taken without credit toward graduation. Students may repeat activity courses. 
101. Cardio Conditioning. Utilizes a variety of exercise modalities (walking, running, cycling, elliptical) and 
formats (intervals, circuits) to improve cardiovascular fitness. Instructor: Branson. Half course.
102. Triathlon Training. Course to include running, biking, and swimming techniques and training; Students 
will increase their cardiorespiratory capacity and learn training and race day strategies such as proper form, 
transitions and nutrition. Students should be a proficient swimmer and supply their own swimming and running 
gear. Bike not required. Instructor: Branson. Half course.
103. Indoor Cycling. Introduction to indoor cycling as an exercise option for all levels of fitness. Focus on a 
variety of simulated rides at varying degrees of intensity. Learn proper riding technique, correct bike settings, 
and appropriate intensity levels for a safe, effective workout. Instructor: Branson. Half course.
104. Fusion Fitness. Formerly called Circuit Training. Combines strength and cardiovascular training using 
a variety of equipment and settings (weight room, studio, outdoors) to provide an efficient and challenging 
program to develop strength, endurance, flexibility and coordination. Instructor: Branson, Finnegan, Hampton, 
McNally. Half course.
105. Pilates Mat and Ball. System of movement emphasizing strong back and abdominal muscles. Stability 
ball for balance and strength. Instructor: Branson. Half course.
106. Advanced Pilates and Barre. A series of exercises based in yoga, dance and sport training. Advanced 
techniques to continue work on posture, breathing, balance, coordination, strength and flexibility. Includes 
barre exercises for lower body strengthening. Equipment used includes stability balls, tubing, gliding discs, foam 
rollers. Previous Pilates training necessary. Instructor: Branson. Half course.
107. Group Fitness Overview. Overview of several group exercise formats; including intervals/circuit, boot 
camp, Zumba/cardio dance, kickboxing, strength training, indoor cycle, yoga, Pilates, and barre. Instructor: 
Branson or Finnegan. Half course.
108. Group Fitness Certification. Covers the knowledge and skills needed to design and conduct group 
fitness programs and to take the group fitness certification test, making participants eligible to apply for a 
group fitness instructor position. Topics to include anatomy, exercise program design, choreography, special 
populations, and legal and professional responsibilities. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
109. Cardio-Kickboxing. A noncontact activity designed to teach self-defense techniques while building the 
muscular and cardiovascular systems. Instructor: Shamp. Half course.
110. Intermediate Cardio-Kickboxing. A workout that combines cardiovascular conditioning and body 
toning while learning more advanced boxing and kickboxing skills for self-defense tactics. Recommended 



 Health, Wellness, and Physical Education (PHYSEDU) 612

prerequisite: Physical Education 109 or Physical Education 160 or previous kickboxing experience. Instructor: 
Shamp. Half course.
112. Running. Introduces a variety of running workouts, including trail running, track intervals, tempo runs, 
and hill repeats. Course will also examine running-related physiology, nutrition, biomechanics, and gear. 
Optionally course may provide road race training for distances from 5k to marathon. Instructor: Branson, 
McNally. Half course.
113. Weight Training. Develop and implement an individualized weight training program. Learn program 
design parameters for different goals (bulking, toning, strength, power), proper form for a variety of exercises 
and equipment, periodization, and safety. Instructor: Bar or McNally. Half course.
115. Fitness for First Years. This course emphasizes both cardiovascular conditioning and strength training. 
Get to know fellow first-year students and learn how to design, implement, and progress a personalized fitness 
program using a variety of exercise formats and equipment. Open only to first-year students. Instructor: 
Hampton, Finnegan. Half course.
116. Weight Training for Women. Learn how to design and implement a weight training program to 
address individualized goals such as toning and increasing strength. Emphasis on functional strength and core 
training. Accommodates beginner to advanced. Instructor: Branson, Finnegan, or McNally. Half course.
117. Fusion Fitness for Women. Formerly called Fitness for Women. Combines strength and cardiovascular 
training using a variety of equipment and settings (weight room, studio, outdoors) to provide an efficient 
and challenging program to develop strength, endurance, flexibility and coordination. Instructor: Branson, 
Finnegan, Hampton. Half course.
118. Personal Trainer Certification. Introduces the knowledge and physical skills needed to prepare for 
the ACE Personal Training Certification exam and become an effective personal trainer (sitting for the PT 
Certification exam is optional). Topics include fitness assessment and exercise program design for different 
exercise goals, as well as business and organizational practices for conducting personal training sessions. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
122. Basketball. Development of individual and team skills. Instructor: King, Silar, or Welsh. Half course.
123. Bowling. Beginning, intermediate, and advanced instruction in the fundamentals of approach, release, 
arm swing, methods of scoring, rules, and etiquette. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
124. Fencing. Foils, épée, and saber. Instructor: Beguinet. Half course.
125. Soccer. Basic soccer skills. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
126. Volleyball. Increase volleyball knowledge and skill through rules presentation, skill practice, and 
tournament play. Topics include passing, serving, setting, hitting, offense, defense, and outdoor play. Instructor: 
Hunter. Half course.
131. Beginning Golf. This course covers rules, terminology, and fundamentals of golf, including pre swing, 
grip, stance and posture, alignment, ball position and clubface alignment. Considers ball flight laws and the golf 
swing as well as aspects of short game including putting, chipping, pitching and sand play. Instructor: Miller. 
Half course.
132. Intermediate Golf. This course covers rules, terminology, and fundamentals of golf, including pre swing, 
grip, stance and posture, alignment, ball position and clubface alignment. Considers ball flight laws and the golf 
swing as well as aspects of short game including putting, chipping, pitching and sand play. Stroke development 
and use of all clubs emphasized. Instructor: Miller. Half course.
133. Advanced Golf. This course covers rules, terminology, and fundamentals of golf, including pre swing, 
grip, stance and posture, alignment, ball position and clubface alignment. Considers ball flight laws and the golf 
swing as well as aspects of short game including putting, chipping, pitching and sand play. Course strategy and 
play will be emphasized. Instructor: Miller. Half course.
135. Level 1 Swimming. Intended for students with no formal swimming experience who need to learn the 
foundation of swimming skills. Will focus on free style, backstroke, putting their face in the water, gaining self 
confidence in the water, water safety. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
136. Level 2 Swimming. Improve on skills learned in Level 1 swimming. Develop strokes in Backstroke, 



Health, Wellness, and Physical Education (PHYSEDU)  613

Freestyle, and Breaststroke. Students should be comfortable in the water and be able to effectively swim 25 
yards of Freestyle and Backstroke. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
137. Level 3 Swimming. Stroke technique and endurance training. Students should know how to swim 
Freestyle, Backstroke, and Breaststroke. Students should be able to swim 100 yards (4 lengths) continuously. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
143. Beginning Tennis. Addresses tennis fundamentals through basic drills and games that will lead into 
match-play. Instructor: Hampton. Half course.
144. Intermediate Tennis. Strategy of the game and stroke development. Instructor: Hampton. Half course.
145. Advanced Tennis. Stroke development with emphasis on strategy. Instructor: Hampton. Half course.
150. Social Dancing. Waltz, Foxtrot, Tango, Swing, Cha-Cha, Rumba and select line dances. Students are 
encouraged to register for the waitlist as the instructor will take students off the waitlist to create an even 
number of leads and follows. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
152. Latin Dance. Merengue, Salsa, Bachata, Cha-Cha, Rumba and others. Students are encouraged to register 
for the waitlist as the instructor will take students off the waitlist to create an even number of leads and follows. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
159. Self Defense for Women. Learn practical and realistic skills for self-protection and defense for women. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
160. Mixed Martial Arts Training. A high energy workout designed to develop physical fitness while 
learning realistic self-defense, kick boxing, and ground fighting techniques, to provide the student with a wide 
self-defense system. Instructor: Shamp. Half course.
161. Aikido. Focuses on cooperation rather than competition. Partner practice maximizes the fluidity of 
delivering the attack, handling an attack, and skills for staying safe. Instructor: Kaufmann. Half course.
162. Intermediate Aikido. More advanced training for Aikido techniques and more fun. If you’ve seen 
movies where the actor rolls across the car you’ve seen an Aikido roll. Recommended prerequisite: one semester 
of martial arts and rolling skills. Instructor: Kaufmann. Half course.
163. Tae Kwon Do/Karate. Emphasis on teaching excellence, personal attention, and tradition. Covers 
variety of self-defense technique and fundamentals, which include basic blocks, punches, kicks, joint 
manipulations, falling techniques, sparring skills (World Taekwondo Federation system), flexibility, and 
conditioning. Etiquette, history, and philosophy of Tae Kwon Do are also taught during class. Instructor: Lee. 
Half course.
164. Intermediate/Advanced Tae Kwon Do/Karate. Emphasis on principles of teaching excellence, 
personal attention, and tradition. Students will further develop Tae Kwon Do skills. Advanced kicking 
techniques, practical self-defense with joint manipulations/throws and Olympic style sparring (WTF system) 
will be introduced. Etiquette, history, philosophy of Tae Kwon Do are also taught during class. Accommodates 
the intermediate to advanced student. Instructor: Lee. Half course.
165. Tai Chi. Graceful, healthful, and powerful. Use your brain to move your body and it becomes a meditation. 
Chinese internal art of self-defense with considerable health benefits. Stretches, strengthens, and improves 
alignment. Instructor: Kaufmann. Half course.
166. Intermediate Tai Chi. Internal martial art develops belly muscles with breathing as the key to moving 
power and energy. Instructor continues to show applications of Tai Chi through study of Chen long form. Push 
hands partner practice. Instructor: Kaufmann. Half course.
167. Aikido: Japanese Sword and Staff. Aikido sword and staff forms were developed to protect oneself 
from multiple attackers and involve coordinating whole body movements for maximum safety and power. 
Course to include solo and partner foundational movements. Training with wooden swords (bokken) will teach 
methods of centering oneself, and develops upper and lower body strength. Instructor: Kaufmann. Half course.
168. Advanced Women’s Self Defense - Krav Maga. Krav Maga for Women is an advanced self-defense 
program. The emphasis of the class is on instinctive movements and efficient counter attacks. Krav Maga is the 
ideal self-defense system for any woman regardless of strength, size or age. The techniques taught will quickly 
give the student the skills and mindset to defend against an attacker. Classes will include standing self-defense 



 Health, Wellness, and Physical Education (PHYSEDU) 614

and ground defenses. Prerequisite: Completion of Self Defense for Women, PHYSEDU 159. Instructor: Staff. 
Half course.
170. Yoga. An introduction to hatha yoga and yoga philosophy with a focus on balance, strength and flexibility 
of mind, body, and breath. Instructor: Branson or Finnegan. Half course.
171. Intermediate Yoga. Building on previous hatha yoga experience to deepen student’s practice, level 
of mindfulness, and understanding of philosophy relevant to experiential work with the goals of improved 
flexibility, strength, balance, concentration, and calmness. Prerequisites: Physical Education 170 or previous 
hatha yoga experience. Instructors: Finnegan. Half course.
172. Massage Therapy. Emphasis on techniques and philosophies of massage therapy which enhance the 
connection of body, mind, and spirit. Benefits and healing potential. Techniques which can be integrated into a 
healthier lifestyle. Instructor: Brame. Half course.
174. Athletic Yoga. Designed to help students gain flexibility, balance, and strength in order to prevent 
injuries and improve form, efficiency, and power. Students will learn breath awareness and mental training to 
increase concentration and focus in the midst of intensity. Instructor: Branson. Half course.
175. Meditation, Movement, Stillness. Explore and practice different styles of meditation from Yoga, Zen, 
Tai Chi and Chi Gong, including forms of sitting, standing, walking and movement meditation. Instructor: 
Kaufmann. Half course.
176. Beginning Equitation I. Introduction to horseback riding: basic horsemanship; walk, trot, and canter; 
as well as learning proper care of a horse before and after riding. Course held off campus. Transportation 
needed. Contact instructor for more information on location and fees. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
177. Beginning Equitation II. Continuation of Beginning Equitation I or for riders with limited experience. 
Students will refine their horse care and walk/trot skills, expand their skills of cantering, and possibly learn how 
to jump. Course is held off campus. Transportation needed. Contact instructor for more information on location 
and fees. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
178. Intermediate Equitation. Skills in hunt seat riding. Emphasis on balanced seat and focus on improving 
skills in walk, trot, canter, and jumping. Course held off campus. Transportation needed. Contact instructor for 
more information on location and fees and to arrange class meeting schedule. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
179. Advanced Equitation: Hunt Seat. Cross-country and stadium jumping techniques. Course held at 
off campus. Contact the instructor to find out more information about location and fees and to arrange a class 
meeting schedule. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
180. Outdoor Recreation. Provides an introduction to basic skills and concepts in a variety of outdoor 
adventure pursuits. Covers trip planning, menu preparation, cooking, orienteering, navigation, first aid and 
safety, with emphasis on ‘learning by doing’. Focus is on the fundamentals of backcountry camping, with an 
introduction to climbing, mountain biking, and kayaking. Includes a 1-2 night trip. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
181. Rock Climbing. Designed for students with minimal or no experience in rock climbing. Includes top rope 
climbing technique, fitness, rappelling, anchor systems, and other topics. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
182. Fly Fishing. Includes fly tying, casting, methods of fly fishing, knots, and practical techniques. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
183. Kayaking. Prepares students to kayak intermediate rivers with focus on safety, enjoyment, and skill. 
Topics include equipment, boat control, advanced paddle techniques and boat maneuvers, river classification, 
trip planning, and fitness. Includes 1-2 night class trip. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
184. SCUBA Diving. Covers knowledge and skills for open water SCUBA dives, including equipment, skills, 
history, physiology, and safety protocols. Learn to assemble, disassemble, check and use all equipment; and 
practice safety skills, buddy rescue, snorkeling, free diving, and work up to SCUBA diving in the dive well. After 
successful completion of course, student is eligible for a SCUBA certification dive, but this dive is not included in 
the class schedule or fee. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
186. Stand Up Paddleboard Fitness. This course will introduce students to various aspects of Stand Up 
Paddleboarding (SUP) including: paddling technique, strokes, turns, water safety, SUP yoga, SUP fitness and 
SUP bootcamp. Using the SUP, students will have a chance to improve core strength and stability, improve 



Health, Wellness, and Physical Education (PHYSEDU)  615

cardiorespiratory fitness level, increase muscular strength and endurance and improve flexibility. Instructor: 
Finnegan. Half course.
189. Campus Recreation. Offers an introduction to activities, programs and services that are commonly 
offered through recreation programs in a collegiate setting. Students will learn about and participate in activities 
associated with aquatics, fitness, intramurals, outdoor adventures, special events and sport clubs. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
190. Care and Prevention of Athletic Injuries. Basic instruction in prevention, recognition, care, and 
rehabilitation of athletic-related injuries. Instructor: Staff. Half course.

Theory Courses
Each theory course listed below carries 1.0 course credit. Taking Theory classes does not cancel a student’s 

ability to take two activity classes for credit toward their undergraduate degree. Theory classes are general electives. 
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Hampton. One course.
192. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study in a field of special interest on a previously 
approved topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic product. Instructor: Aphin, 
Dale, McNally, or Yakola. One course.
203. Diet and Nutrition. NS How diet affects well-being and reduces risk of certain diseases. Basic nutrition 
principles, sports performance enhancement, supplements, disordered eating, vegetarianism, herbs, diet and 
disease, and current trends in nutrition. Instructor: Alphin. One course.
204. Women’s Health. Introduces students to a variety of women’s health issues, as well as mental, physical, 
emotional, social, and environmental factors affecting college-aged women. A practical, hands on approach will 
emphasize information, resources, and skills to help students achieve and maintain a healthy lifestyle. Topics 
include exercise, nutrition, stress and resilience, sleep, substance use, sexual health, mental health, chronic 
disease, and behavior change models. Instructor: McNally. One course.
205. Health Effects of Exercise. Examines the physical and mental health benefits and risks of exercise, 
including prevention and treatment effects for cardiovascular disease, diabetes, cancer, depression, anxiety, 
dementia and improvements in cognitive function. Course includes a service-learning component where 
students work in the community a minimum of 20 hours across the semester to promote physical activity. 
Instructor: McNally. One course.
206. Exercise Physiology. NS Reviews physiological adaptations (cardiorespiratory, musculoskeletal, 
nervous, endocrine) that occur with exercise training leading to improved health and performance. Examines 
practical applications such as workout design, nutrition, fitness testing, and body composition management. 
Instructor: McNally. One course.
207. Exercise and Mental Health. NS Examines the neural and psychological correlates of exercise that 
influence mental and cognitive health. Explores exercise guidelines and theories of exercise behaviors. Topics 
include exercise and depression, anxiety, stress, self-esteem, body image, circadian rhythms, learning, dementia, 
and mental states and performance. Instructor: McNally or staff. One course. C-L: Psychology 214
212. Sports Media. Examine the production and consumption of information through various media forms 
and the impact it has on influencing and shaping the sports industry. Topics include content development and 
delivery through television, radio, newspaper, and the internet, image shaping through the media, regulatory 
issues, intellectual property and content, market coverage and current hot topics. Instructor: Moore. One 
course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media
220. History and Issues of Sports. Sports from ancient to modern times with an emphasis on sports in 
America. Not open to students who have taken this course as Health, Physical Education, and Recreation 89S. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
221. Administration in Sports Management. Philosophy, financial structure, administrative structure, 
fund-raising, NCAA legislation, personnel decisions, and scheduling events. Instructor: Yakola. One course.
222. Sports Marketing. The multi-faceted elements associated with marketing within the sports industry. 
Instructor: Yakola. One course.
223. Sport Ethics. Moral reasoning and ethical values in sport today. Emphasis on character development and 



 Physics (PHYSICS)616

sportsmanship and their influence on fair play for everyone. Instructor: Dale. One course.
224. Sport Finance. Financial resource management in the sports industry including forms of ownership, 
financial analysis, feasibility studies, revenue generation, economic impact, and current issues. Instructor: 
Yakola. One course.
225. Sports Leadership Development. Examine the principles and practices of leadership development 
with an emphasis on their application to sports as applied to the individual and in leading a team and /or 
organization. Topics to include value based leadership, self-awareness as a leader, ethical leadership, leadership 
styles, strategies for effective leadership development including and through proper communication, motivation, 
conflict resolution, team building, group dynamics, and decision making. Instructor: Yakola. One course.
240. Theory and Practice of Coaching. Fundamentals, strategies, and psychology of coaching. Emphasis 
on basketball, and track and field. Additional topics such as safety and liability, gender equity, the media, 
regulations, and ethics. Instructor: Welsh. One course.
241. Psychology of Sport and Performance. To provide students with an in-depth view of the theoretical 
and applied aspects of the psychology of sport and physical activity with an emphasis on performance 
enhancement. Instructor: Dale. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Nutrition: Analysis of Dietary Trends. Brief overview of basic concepts of 
nutrition. Curriculum includes dietary self-assessment, critical evaluation of popular diets, and examination, 
evaluation, and discussion of current trends in nutrition. Instructor: Branson. One course.

Physics
Professor Bass, Chair; Professor Scholberg, Associate Chair; Professor Arce, Director of Undergraduate Stud-
ies; Professors Aspinwall, Baranger, Bass, Beratan, Bray, Brunel, Chandrasekharan, Chang, Curtarolo, Dobbins, 
Edwards, Finkelstein, Gao, Goshaw, Greenside, Howell, Johnson, Kim, Kotwal, Kruse, Liu, Mehen, Mueller, Oh, 
Petters, Plesser, Samei, Schmidt, Scholberg, Smith, Socolar, Springer, Walter, Warren, Wu, and Yang; Associ-
ate Professors Arce, Charbonneau, Lu, Mikkelsen, and Teitsworth; Assistant Professors Barbeau, Barthel, Bu-
chler, Haravifard, Marvian, Scolnic, Troxel, and Vossen; Professors Emeriti Evans, Palmer, Roberson, Robinson, 
Thomas, Tornow, R. Walter, and Weller; Associate Professor of the Practice Mercer; Associate Research Professor 
Driehuys; Adjunct Professors Ahmed, Ciftan, Everitt, Guenther, Lawson, Skatrud, and West; Adjunct Associate 
Professor Tonchev; Adjunct Assistant Professor Baker; Lecturer Brown; Instructor Roy

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Physics offers its majors a chance to learn about many extraordinary insights that the human race has 

discovered in its effort to understand the universe. Examples include what are the properties of matter and light, 
what are the concise remarkable laws that govern the properties of matter and light, how does complex structure 
emerge from the interactions of simpler pieces, and how physical laws and insights can be used to solve a great 
diversity of basic and applied problems. The analytical and experimental insights that a physics or biophysics 
major gains are valuable to the study of all areas of science and engineering. The Department of Physics also offers 
courses for students with a casual interest in science who wish to learn about what physicists have discovered 
about nature and how physicists think about nature.

Courses in Physics (PHYSICS)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Walter. One course.
131. Introductory Lecture on Big Questions in Physics. NS, STS Introduction to six big questions 
representing frontiers of twenty-first-century physics, such as what are the ultimate laws of nature, how does 
complex structure arise, and how can physics benefit society. Classes will involve presentations by researchers 
and by students, discussions of journal articles, and tours of physics labs involved with related research. 
Recommended prerequisite: precalculus and at least one quantitative science course at the high school level, 
such as chemistry or physics. Instructor: Mueller. Half course.
131-1. Introductory Lecture on Big Questions in Physics. NS, STS Introduction to six big questions 
representing frontiers of twenty-first-century physics, such as what are the ultimate laws of nature, how does 
complex structure arise, and how can physics benefit society. Classes will involve presentations by researchers 



Physics (PHYSICS) 617

and by students, discussions of journal articles, and tours of physics labs involved with related research. 
Recommended prerequisite: precalculus and at least one quantitative science course at the high school level, 
such as chemistry or physics. Instructor: Barbeau, Ahmed, Roy, Teitsworth. One course.
133. The Physics of Sports. NS Examines the physics behind a wide variety of sports, including football, 
baseball, hockey, soccer, track and field, swimming, and many others. Illuminates how scientific concepts such 
as force, momentum and energy provide a deeper understanding and appreciation of common sports plays seen 
or made on the field. Instructor: Scolnic. One course.
134. Introduction to Astronomy. NS, QS How observation and scientific insights can be used to discover 
properties of the universe. Topics include an appreciation of the night sky, properties of light and matter, the 
solar system, how stars evolve and die, the Milky Way and other galaxies, the evolution of the universe from 
a hot Big Bang, exotic objects like black holes, and the possibility for extraterrestrial life. Prerequisite: high-
school-level knowledge of algebra and geometry. Instructor: Plesser. One course.
136. Acoustics and Music. NS, R, W The physical principles underlying musical instruments, room 
acoustics, and the human ear. Analysis, reproduction, and synthesis of musical sounds. No previous knowledge 
of physics assumed. Instructor: Socolar. One course. C-L: Music 126
137S. Energy in the 21st Century and Beyond. NS, STS Concepts of energy from a scientific perspective 
for understanding problems of energy conversion, storage, and transmission in modern society. Topics include 
fundamental concepts (kinetic and potential energy, heat, basic thermodynamics, mass-energy equivalence), 
established power generation methods and their environmental impacts, emerging and proposed technologies 
(solar, wind, tidal, advanced fusion concepts). Final team project. Sophomores, juniors, and seniors from non-
science majors are particularly encouraged to attend; no previous knowledge of physics is assumed. Instructor: 
Teitsworth. One course. C-L: Energy and the Environment
139S. Physics and Society: Nuclear Energy. NS, STS, W Core topics include: science and technology of 
mass-scale generation of electrical power; history, science and technology of nuclear fission reactors; methods 
for comparing the cost of different energy generating technologies (from mining raw materials, to constructing 
power plants, to disposal of byproduct and environmental cleanup, to decommission of power plants); and 
political and international security issues associated with nuclear fission power reactor technology. This course 
is highly recommended for juniors and seniors with non-science majors. Not open to students having credit for 
Physics 137S. Instructor: Howell. One course.
141L. General Physics I. NS, QS First part of a two-semester calculus-based course intended for students in 
health or life sciences. Core topics: kinematics, dynamics, systems of particles, conservation laws, statics, fluids, 
oscillations, waves. Additional possible topics: sound, diffusion, thermodynamics, selected applications. For 
credit, enrollment in Physics 141L lecture, lab and discussion sections (Physics 141L9, 141D) required. Physics 
majors should enroll in Physics 161D/164L, 162D/165L in their first year. Not recommended for students with 
credit for Physics 151L, 152L, 161D. Recommended prerequisite: college calculus (Mathematics 21, Mathematics 
105 and 106, or Mathematics 111). Mathematics 122 also recommended (may be taken concurrently). Instructor: 
Brown, Kotwal. One course.
141LA. General Physics I. NS, QS First part of a two-semester calculus-based course for students in health 
or life sciences. Core topics: kinematics, dynamics, systems of particles, conservation laws, statics, fluids, 
oscillations, waves. Other possible topics: sound, diffusion, thermodynamics, selected applications. For credit, 
enrollment in Physics 141LA lecture, lab and discussion sections required. Physics majors should enroll in 
Physics 161D/164L, 162D/165L in their first year. Not recommended for students with credit for Physics 151L, 
152L, 161D. Recommended prerequisite: one year of college calculus such as Mathematics 105L, 106L, 21. 
Mathematics 122 recommended. Open only to students in the Duke Marine Lab. Taught in Beaufort at Duke 
Marine Lab. Instructor: Tyndall or Brown. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
142L. General Physics II. NS, QS The second semester of a calculus-based course for students in health 
or life sciences. Core topics: electric fields, circuits, magnetic fields, Faraday’s law, Maxwell’s equations, 
electromagnetic waves, properties of light, geometric optics, wave optics. Additional possible topics: optical 
instrumentation, quantum physics, selected applications. Students must enroll in a lecture (Physics 142L), a lab 
(Physics 142L9), and a discussion section (Physics 142L9D) to receive credit. Closed to students having credit for 
Physics 152L, 153L or 162D. Prerequisites: Physics 141L, 151L, or 161D. Instructor: Howell, Wu. One course.



 Physics (PHYSICS)618

142LA. General Physics II. NS, QS The second semester of a calculus-based course for students in health 
or life sciences. Core topics: electric fields, circuits, magnetic fields, Faraday’s law, Maxwell’s equations, 
electromagnetic waves, properties of light, geometric optics, wave optics. Additional possible topics: optical 
instrumentation, quantum physics, selected applications. Students must enroll in Physics 142LA lecture, lab 
and discussion sections to receive credit. Closed to students having credit for Physics 152L, 153L or 162D. 
Prerequisite: Physics 141L, 141LA, 151L, or 161D. Open only to students in the Duke Marine Lab. Taught in 
Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Brown. One course. C-L: Marine Sciences
151L. Introductory Mechanics. NS, QS The fundamentals of classic physics. Topics include: vectors, units, 
Newton’s Laws, static equilibrium, motion in one and two dimensions, rotation, conservation of momentum, 
work and energy, gravity, simple and chaotic oscillations. Numerical methods used to solve problems in a 
workstation environment. Intended principally for non-physics majors in the physical sciences and engineering. 
Students planning a major in physics should enroll instead in Physics 161L, 162L in their first year. Closed to 
students having credit for Physics 141L or 161L. Prerequisites: Mathematics 21, 122, or equivalent; Mathematics 
122 may be taken concurrently with Physics 151L. Instructor: Roy, Brown. One course.
152L. Introductory Electricity, Magnetism, and Optics. NS, QS Intended principally for students in 
engineering and the physical sciences. Topics include: electric charge, electric fields, Gauss’s Law, potential, 
capacitance, electrical current, resistance, circuit concepts, magnetic fields, magnetic and electric forces, 
Ampere’s Law, magnetic induction, Faraday’s Law, inductance, Maxwell’s Equations, electromagnetic waves, 
elementary geometric optics, wave interference, and diffraction. Prerequisites: Physics 151L and Mathematics 
122 or equivalents. Instructor: Roy. One course.
153L. Applications of Physics: A Modern Perspective. NS, QS Intended principally for students in 
engineering and the physical sciences as a continuation of Physics 152L. Topics include: mechanics from a 
microscopic perspective, the atomic nature of matter, energy, energy quantization, entropy, the kinetic theory 
of gases, the efficiency of engines, electromagnetic radiation, the photon nature of light, physical optics and 
interference, waves and particles, applications of wave mechanics. For credit, enrollment in Phy 153L, lab and 
discussion (Phy 153L9, 153D) sections required. (Closed to students having credit for Physics 142L or 162D). 
Prerequisites: Physics 152L and Mathematics 212 or instructor’s permission. Instructor: Springer. One course.
160. Frontiers of 21st Century Physics. NS, QS This course is a one-semester introduction to current 
research topics in physics, organized around six “Big Questions” in physics, including: what are the ultimate 
laws of nature, how does complex structure arise, and how can physics benefit society? This course is more 
quantitative than 131S and is designed for prospective physics majors as well as those interested in deeper 
understanding of the physical world. Prerequisites: Precalculus and at least one quantitative science course at 
the high school level, such as chemistry or physics. Instructor: Kruse. One course.
161D. Fundamentals of Physics I. NS, QS First semester of a two-semester sequence intended for potential 
physics or biophysics majors. Course discusses vector algebra, description of motion, Newton’s laws, work and 
energy, systems of particles, conservation laws, rotation, gravity, mechanics of fluids, oscillations, mechanical 
waves, and sound. Prerequisites: Mathematics 21 and 122 or equivalents; Mathematics 122 may be taken 
concurrently. Recommended that course is taken concurrently with Physics 164L. Instructor: Brown. One 
course.
162D. Fundamentals of Physics II. NS, QS Second semester of a two-semester sequence intended for 
potential physics or biophysics majors. Course discusses basic principles and applications of electrodynamics, 
including electric fields, Gauss’s Law, electric potential, capacitance, DC and AC circuits, magnetic fields, 
Ampere’s Law, electric and magnetic forces, magnetic induction, Maxwell’s equations, electromagnetic waves, 
properties of light, ray optics, and wave optics. Prerequisites: Physics 161D and Math 122 or consent from 
instructor. Recommended that course is taken concurrently with Physics 165L. Instructor: Brown. One course.
163D. Fundamentals of Mechanics and Electromagnetism. NS, QS One semester calculus-based 
course covering the fundamental principles of mechanics, electricity, magnetism, and optics. This team-
based course covers topics of Physics 161D and 162D that are not included in the high school AP Physics C 
curriculum, including fluids, damped and driven oscillations, waves, sound, AC circuits, Maxwell’s equations, 
light, geometric optics, and physical (wave) optics. Prerequisite: Physics 25, Physics 26, Mathematics 21, and 
Mathematics 122/122L (Mathematics 122/122L can be taken concurrently). Not open to students who have 
taken Physics 141L, 142L, 151L, 152L, 161D, or 162D. Instructor: Brown. One course.



Physics (PHYSICS) 619

164L. Introductory Experimental Physics I. NS, QS, W First in a series of half-courses on experimental 
physics techniques for physics and biophysics majors. Experiments focus on core physics concepts of mechanics: 
force, motion, conservation laws, and oscillations. Students work in teams and use computers to collect, 
visualize, and analyze data. Key components: written documentation of experimental procedures and results 
in a scientific notebook; interpreting results and testing hypotheses; coding (Python), experimental design 
and refinement; multiple opportunities for open-ended laboratory activities that inspire team and individual 
creativity. Instructor: McKenzie. Half course.
165L. Introductory Experimental Physics II. NS, QS, W Second in series of half-courses on experimental 
physics techniques for physics and biophysics majors. Focus on core physics concepts of electricity, magnetism 
and optics: electrostatics, magnetostatics, magnetic induction, electromagnetic waves, geometrical and physical 
optics. Students work in teams and use computers to collect, visualize and analyze data. Key components: 
written documentation of experimental procedures and results in a scientific notebook; interpreting results and 
testing hypotheses; coding (Python), experimental design and refinement; multiple opportunities for open-
ended laboratory activities that inspire team and individual creativity. Prerequisite: Physics 164L. Instructor: 
McKenzie. Half course.
174. Introduction to Frontiers of Biophysics. NS, STS Once-per-week class with goal of introducing 
students to representative frontiers of biophysics. Course will be a mixture of presentations by researchers, 
presentations by students of journal articles, and some lab tours. Prerequisites: Knowledge equivalent to 
Advanced Placement courses in biology, chemistry and physics, or with permission of the instructor. Instructor: 
Schmidt. Half course.
175. Introduction to Physics in Medicine. NS The aim of the course is to introduce to physics and life 
science students the critical role of medical physics in medicine including clinical service, patient care, scientific 
innovation and clinical problem solving. Four main areas of professional activities will be covered: Radiation 
Therapy, Diagnostic Imaging, Health Physics, and Nuclear Medicine. The course will highlight key clinical 
challenges where medical physicists impact clinical practice and improve patient care and treatment outcomes. 
This introductory course will be taught by medical physics faculty who work in Duke Hospital Clinics and have 
joint appointments in the Duke Medical Physics Graduate Program. Prerequisite: Physics 141L/142L, 151L/152L, 
or 161L/162L. Instructor: Kapadia and Oldham. One course.
190. Special Topics in Physics. Special topics in physics, intended for non-majors. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Physics. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Physics. Special topics in physics, intended for non-majors. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190S-1. Special Topics in Physics. Special topics in physics, intended for non-majors. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.
264L. Optics and Modern Physics. NS, QS Third course in sequence for physics and biophysics majors. 
Introductory treatments of special relativity and quantum mechanics. Topics include: wave mechanics and 
interference; relativistic kinematics, energy and momentum; the Schrodinger equation and its interpretation; 
quantum particles in one-dimension; spin; fermions and bosons; the hydrogen spectrum. Applications to 
crystallography, semiconductors, atomic physics and optics, particle physics, and cosmology. Prerequisites: 
Physics 162D and Mathematics 212 or their equivalents. Instructor: Brown, Haravifard. One course.
271L. Electronics. NS, QS Elements of electronics including circuits, transfer functions, solid-state devices, 
transistor circuits, operational amplifier applications, digital circuits, and computer interfaces. Lectures and 
laboratory. Prerequisites: Physics 142L, 152L, or 162D, or equivalent; Mathematics 212 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Finkelstein. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
305. Introduction to Astrophysics. NS, QS Basic principles of astronomy treated quantitatively. 
Cosmological models, galaxies, stars, interstellar matter, the solar system, and experimental techniques. 
Mathematics 212 and Mathematics 216 strongly encouraged. Prerequisites: Physics 264 or instructor consent. 
Instructor: Barbeau. One course.



 Physics (PHYSICS)620

320L. Optics and Photonics. NS Ray optics, wave optics, beam optics, resonators, atom-photons, 
interaction, interference, diffraction, polarization, lasers, light detection, electromagnetic optics. Laboratory 
experiments apply concepts in basic optics. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 270L or 
equivalent. Instructor: Jokerst, Stiff-Roberts, Yoshie or staff. C-L: Physics 320L. One course. C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 325L, Electrical and Computer Engineering 340L
346. Introduction to Methods and Concepts in Particle Physics. NS, QS Particle physics is the study 
of the fundamental nature of the universe, including its fundamental constituents and the fields through which 
they interact. This course introduces our current understanding, starting with a review of special relativity and 
quantum mechanics, before discussing their application to particle physics, the importance of symmetries, 
experimental techniques (including introductions to how particle colliders and detectors work), statistical 
and computing methods for data analysis, philosophical considerations in our quest for a fundamental 
understanding, and prospects for the future. Prerequisite: Physics 264L. Recommended prerequisite: Physics 
141L/142L, 151L/152L, or 161L/162L. Instructor: Kruse. One course.
361. Intermediate Mechanics. NS, QS Newtonian mechanics at the intermediate level, Lagrangian 
mechanics, linear oscillations, chaos, dynamics of continuous media, motion in noninertial reference frames. 
Prerequisite: Mathematics 216 or equivalent (may be taken concurrently). Instructor: Scholberg. One course.
362D. Electricity and Magnetism. NS, QS Electrostatic fields and potentials, boundary value problems, 
magnetic induction, energy in electromagnetic fields, Maxwell’s equations, introduction to electromagnetic 
radiation. Prerequisite: Mathematics 216 or equivalent. Instructor: Finkelstein. One course.
363. Thermal Physics. NS, QS Thermal properties of matter treated using the basic concepts of entropy, 
temperature, chemical potential, partition function, and free energy. Topics include the laws of thermodynamics, 
ideal gases, thermal radiation and electrical noise, heat engines, Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions, 
semiconductor statistics, kinetic theory, and phase transformations. Also taught as Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 311. Prerequisite: Physics 264L. Instructor: Socolar. One course.
364L. Advanced Experimental Physics. NS Last in series of half-courses on experimental physics 
techniques for physics and biophysics majors. Students will perform a single advanced laboratory project. 
Biophysics-related laboratory projects are available. Includes written and oral presentation of results. 
Prerequisite: Physics 264L. Instructor: Bomze, staff. Half course. C-L: Biology 364L
365L. Advanced Experimental Physics. NS One of several undergraduate courses on experimental physics 
techniques suitable for physics and biophysics majors. Identical in content and method to Physics 364L except 
it requires two half semester advanced laboratory projects for one full semester credit. Biophysics-related 
laboratory projects are available. Includes written and oral presentation of results. Prerequisite: Physics 264L. 
Instructor: Bomze, staff. One course. C-L: Biology 365L
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Physics. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
414. Introduction to Biophysics. NS, QS How theory and experimental techniques from physics can be 
used to analyze and understand biological structure and function, including chemical, mechanical, electrical, 
collective, and information-processing aspects. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L and 
knowledge of statistical physics by taking either Physics 363 or Chemistry 311. Instructor: Greenside. One 
course. C-L: Biology 418
415. Biophysics II. NS, QS Quantitative understanding of biological systems through the application of 
physical principles. Course will emphasize topics that span multiple length and time scales, and different 
levels of biological organization. Two to four topics per semester, including possibly organismal motion from 
molecular processes to whole organisms, nervous systems from membrane channels to neuronal networks, noise 
in biology, novel biophysical technologies, etc. Recommended prerequisite: Biology 201L or 203L, Mathematics 
212 and 216 or equivalent, and calculus-based introductory physics or permission of the instructors. Instructor: 
Mercer, Greenside. One course. C-L: Biology 425
417S. Advanced Physics Laboratory and Seminar. NS, QS, R, W Experiments involving the fields of 
electricity, magnetism, heat, optics, and modern physics. Written and oral presentations of results. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Oh. One course.



Physics (PHYSICS) 621

464D. Quantum Mechanics I. NS, QS Introduction to the non-relativistic quantum description of matter. 
Topics include experimental foundations, wave-particle duality, Schrodinger wave equation, interpretation 
of the wave function, the state vector, Hilbert space, Dirac notation, Heisenberg uncertainty principle, one-
dimensional quantum problems, tunneling, the harmonic oscillator, three-dimensional quantum problems, 
angular momentum, the hydrogen atom, spin, angular momentum addition, identical particles, elementary 
perturbation theory, fine/hyperfine structure of hydrogen, dynamics of two-level systems, and applications 
to atoms, molecules, and other systems. Prerequisite: Mathematics 216 or 221 and Physics 264L. Instructor: 
Springer. One course.
465. Quantum Mechanics II. NS, QS Advanced topics in quantum mechanics with applications to current 
research. Topics might include theory of angular momentum, role of symmetry in quantum mechanics, 
perturbation methods, scattering theory, the Dirac equation of relativistic quantum mechanics, systems of 
identical particles, and quantum entanglement. Prerequisite: Physics 464. Instructor: Barthel. One course.
491. Independent Study: Advanced Topics. Reading in a field of special interest under the supervision of 
a faculty member. Intended for students interested in studying topics not offered in regularly available courses. 
Format and grading are determined by the supervising faculty member and then approved by the DUS. Consent 
of instructor required. One course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Original research conducted under the supervision of a faculty 
member. At least one written substantive report or a poster presentation is required. Consent of instructor and 
DUS required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Thesis Independent Study. R, W Original research conducted under the supervision of a faculty 
member leading to a substantial written report that follows standard guidelines for the presentation of physics 
research. The report must be revised at least once in response to feedback from the instructor. Typically taken 
following Physics 493 or summer research experience with the instructor. Consent of instructor and DUS 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
501. Survey of Nonlinear and Complex Systems. NS Survey lectures by Duke experts active in CNCS 
research; regular attendance in the CNCS seminar series; and a weekly meeting to discuss the lectures and 
seminars. May be repeated once. Prerequisite: Physics 513. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Nonlinear and 
Complex Systems 501
505. Introduction to Nuclear and Particle Physics. NS, QS Introductory survey course on nuclear and 
particle physics. Phenomenology and experimental foundations of nuclear and particle physics; fundamental 
forces and particles, composites. Interaction of particles with matter and detectors. SU(2), SU(3), models of 
mesons and baryons. Weak interactions and neutrino physics. Lepton-nucleon scattering, form factors and 
structure functions. QCD, gluon field and color. W and Z fields, electro-weak unification, the CKM matrix, 
Nucleon-nucleon interactions, properties of nuclei, single and collective particle models. Electromagnetic and 
hadronic interactions with nuclei. Nuclear reactions and nuclear structure, nuclear astrophysics. Relativistic 
heavy ion collisions. Prerequisite: for undergraduates, Physics 464, 465; for graduate students, Physics 764, 
which may be taken concurrently. Instructor: Oh. One course.
509. Quantum Nanophysics. NS Quantum phenomena in nanostructures, emphasizing interference, 
dimensionality, and electron interactions. Uses current research topics to introduce fundamental building 
blocks of the subject, thereby providing in addition a background in solid-state physics. Topics covered may 
include: graphene, carbon nanotubes, and topological insulators; scanning tunneling microscopy; quantum 
point contacts and quantum dots; spintronics, single electronics, and molecular electronics; superconducting 
qubits; giant and colossal magnetoresistance; quantum Hall effect. Emphasis placed on phenomena observed in 
the last two decades. Prerequisite: Physics 464 or instructor consent. Instructor: Baranger. One course.
513. Nonlinear Dynamics. NS, QS, R Introduction to the study of temporal patterns in nonequilibrium 
systems. Theoretical, computational, and experimental insights used to explain phase space, bifurcations, 
stability theory, universality, attractors, fractals, chaos, and time-series analysis. Each student carries out an 
individual research project on a topic in nonlinear dynamics and gives a formal presentation of the results. 
Prerequisite: Computer Science 101, Mathematics 216, and Physics 161D, 162D, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Computer Science 524, Nonlinear and Complex Systems 513
516. Quantum Materials: Introduction to Solid State Physics. Microscopic structure of solids, liquids, 



 Physics (PHYSICS)622

liquid crystals, polymers, and spin systems; elastic scattering and long-range order; topological defects; 
electronic structure of crystals (metals and semiconductors); phonons and inelastic scattering; magnetism; 
superconductivity. Recommended prerequisite: Physics 464, 465, and 563. Instructor: Baranger. One course.
522. Special and General Relativity. NS, QS Review of special relativity; ideas of general relativity; 
mathematics of curved space-time; formation of a geometric theory of gravity; Einstein field equation applied to 
problems such as the cosmological red-shift and blackholes. Prerequisite: Physics 361 and Mathematics 216 or 
equivalents. Instructor: Plesser. One course.
555. Introduction to Cosmology. NS, QS Cosmology is the study of the origin, structure and evolution of 
the Universe itself. The goal of this course is to provide an advanced undergraduate or introductory graduate 
description of the “standard” big bang theory of the Universe, the Lambda-Cold Dark Matter model, that 
includes recent experimental developments. Topics include: the observational and theoretical basis for the 
model; spacetime and the Friedmann-Lemaitre-Robertson-Walker metric; big bang cosmology and the 
Universe’s contents and dynamics; the cosmic microwave background; formation of galaxies, large-scale 
structure, and gravitational lensing; dark matter and dark energy; current and future observational experiments. 
Recommended prerequisite: Physics 361 and Mathematics 216 or Physics 264L. Instructor: Troxel. One course.
556. Stellar Astrophysics. NS, QS This course surveys the key physics of stellar structure, interiors, and 
evolution. The focus is on the essential concepts for understanding dynamical processes in stars, the relevant 
equations and their approximate solutions. Topics include: timescales, scaling relations, equations of state, 
radiative transfer, convection, nuclear reactions and rates, white dwarfs, neutron stars, and supernovae. We 
will aim throughout the course to impart a better physical and intuitive understanding of the essential meaning 
of the equations, processes, and principles that govern stars of all sort, and of their universality. The intended 
audience is graduate students and upper-level undergraduates. Prerequisite: Physics 305. Instructor: Scolnic. 
One course.
562. Fundamentals of Electromagnetism. QS Electrostatics, Laplace’s equation, multipole expansion, 
dielectrics, magnetostatics, magnetization, Maxwell equations, gauge transformations, electromagnetic waves, 
Fresnel equations, and waveguides. Prerequisite: Physics 362 or equivalent and 560. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
563. Introduction to Statistical Mechanics. NS, QS Fundamentals of kinetic theory, thermodynamics and 
statistical mechanics with applications to physics and chemistry. Undergraduate enrollment requires consent of 
director of undergraduate studies. Prerequisite: Physics 464. Instructor: Finkelstein. One course.
566. Computational Physics. NS, QS Introduction to numerical algorithms and programming 
methodologies that are useful for studying a broad variety of physics problems via simulation. Applications 
include projectile motion, oscillatory dynamics, chaos, electric fields, wave propagation, diffusion, phase 
transitions, and quantum mechanics. Prerequisites: Physics 264L and 363. Experience with a programming 
language is desirable, but can be acquired while taking the course. Instructor: Walter. One course.
567. Theoretical Neuroscience. NS, QS Introductory course on theoretical neuroscience. Neuronal 
biophysics: ions, membranes, channels. Single neuron models: Hodgkin-Huxley, 2D reductions, phase plane 
analysis. Leaky integrate-and-fire model, response to stochastic inputs. Models of synapses and synaptic 
plasticity. Models of networks at various scales. Network dynamics: rate models, networks of spiking neurons. 
Coding and decoding by single neurons and populations of neurons. Unsupervised learning, supervised learning, 
reinforcement learning. Adequate for any graduate student in physics or other quantitative fields (mathematics, 
statistics, engineering, computer science) and undergraduate majors in such fields. Instructor: Brunel. One 
course. C-L: Neuroscience 567
590. Selected Topics in Theoretical Physics. Topics vary as indicated on Physics Department Web site. 
Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
603. Representation Theory. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 603
621. Advanced Optics. QS This course presents a rigorous treatment of topics in Photonics and Optics 
targeted at students with an existing photonics or optics background. Topics will include, Optical Sources, 
Statistical Optics and Coherence Theory, Detection of Radiation; Nonlinear Optics; Waveguides and Optical 
Fibers; Modern Optical Modulators; Ultrafast lasers and Applications. These topics will be considered 
individually and then from a system level perspective. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 340L 



Physics (PHYSICS) 623

or equivalent. Instructor: Adam Wax. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 541, Biomedical 
Engineering 552
622. General Relativity. NS, QS This course introduces the concepts and techniques of Einstein’s general 
theory of relativity. The mathematics of Riemannian (Minkowskian) geometry will be presented in a self-
contained way. The principle of equivalence and its implications will be discussed. Einstein’s equations will be 
presented, as well as some important solutions including black holes and cosmological solutions. Advanced 
topics will be pursued subject to time limitations and instructor and student preferences. Prerequisite: A 
familiarity with the special theory and facility with multivariate calculus. Instructor: Aspinwall. One course. C-L: 
Mathematics 527
627. Quantum Information Science. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 
523
655. Astrophysics. NS, QS An introductory survey of astrophysics with an emphasis on topics of current 
interest. Introduction to General Relativity, Stellar and Galactic Evolution, Standard Cosmology, Big-Bang 
Nucleosynthesis, Early Universe, Neutrino Astrophysics, Supernovae and Cosmic Rays, Special Topics. 
Prerequisites: Physics 361, 362, 363, 464; Physics 465 is recommended. Instructor: Staff. One course.
671. Quantum Optics. NS, QS The linear and nonlinear interaction of electromagnetic radiation and matter. 
Topics include lasers, second-harmonic generation, atomic coherence, slow and fast light, squeezing of the 
electromagnetic field, and cooling and trapping of atoms. Prerequisite: Physics 465 and 560. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.

The Major
By the time they graduate, physics majors are well prepared for graduate work in physics, engineering, 

and in other science disciplines; for the study of medicine; and for employment in commercial and industrial 
organizations as well as in governmental laboratories. Students planning to major in physics should take Physics 
161D, 162D, 164L, and 165L during their first year if possible; those with qualifying advanced placement credit can 
substitute Physics 163D for Physics 161D and 162D. Students should also arrange to complete the mathematics 
requirements by the end of their sophomore year.

For the AB Degree
Prerequisites. Physics 161D, 162D, 164L, and 165L or equivalents; Mathematics 122/122L, 212, and 221
Major Requirements. Physics 264L and 363 and two courses out of 361, 362D, 464D, 513, or one 

300-level or higher physics course approved by the director of undergraduate studies. One laboratory-related 
course which can be Physics 271L, 417S, or 493 with a substantial experimental component. One other physics 
elective numbered above 200.

For the BS Degree
Prerequisites. Physics 161D, 162D, 164L, and 165L or equivalents; Mathematics 122/122L, 212, 221, and 

356 
Major Requirements. Physics 264L, 361, 362D, 363, 417S, 464D, one physics elective numbered 200 or 

higher, and one physics elective numbered 300 or higher.\

Concentration in Astrophysics
An optional concentration in astrophysics allows students to immerse themselves in contemporary issues 

such as the nature of dark matter and dark energy, the evolution of the early universe, and the structures, from 
galaxies to stars, that characterize it today. 

Requirements. In addition to the physics major requirements, Physics 305 and three additional 
astrophysics courses are required. Two or more of these must be selected from among Physics 555, 556 , or an 
independent study (Physics 491, 493, or 495) approved by the director of undergraduate studies as an astrophysics 
course. One of Physics 346, 505, 522, 622, 655, or Mathematics 575 may be chosen. Courses for the astrophysics 
concentration may also satisfy the elective requirements for the major.



 Physics (PHYSICS)624

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers students many possibilities to do physics research, and this research may lead to 

Graduation with Distinction. Consult with the director of undergraduate studies during or before the junior year 
and see the section on honors in this bulletin. 

The Minor
Requirements. Physics 161/161L and 162/162L or equivalents; Physics 264L; two additional physics 

courses numbered above 200 that need to be approved by the physics director of undergraduate studies or by a 
physics advisor. A total of five physics courses must be taken at Duke to satisfy the minor.

The Biophysics Major
Biophysics is the study of quantitative biological questions using insights, concepts, theory, and 

experimental techniques from physics, as well as knowledge from biology, chemistry, mathematics, and computer 
science. The major is a good choice for students who like biology and who enjoy thinking quantitatively. The 
major prepares students for graduate school in biophysics, diverse areas of biology like cell biology, neuroscience, 
physiology, and health professions like medicine, veterinary school, and dentistry. (But if a student anticipates 
applying to graduate school in physics, he or she should consider the Physics major as an alternative.). This major 
is administered in close cooperation with the departments of biology and chemistry.

For the AB Degree
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL (or equivalent); Mathematics 122 (or equivalent), 212 and 216.
Major Requirements. Biology 201L and either Biology 202L or 220 or Biology 203L and 220; Physics 

161, 164L, 162, 165L (or equivalent); Physics 364L or equivalent; Physics 264L (or Chemistry 310 and either 310L 
or 311L), Physics 363 (or Chemistry 311); one of Physics: 361, 362, 464, or a director-approved 300-level or above 
course not including independent studies; Physics 414 and 415; one 200-level or higher director-approved elective 
course relevant to the biophysics major.

For the BS Degree
Prerequisites. Chemistry 101DL (or equivalent); Mathematics 122 (or equivalent), 212 (or 222), 221 (or 

218), and 356.
Major Requirements. Biology 201L and either Biology 202L or 220 or Biology 203L and 220; Physics 

161, 164L, 162, 165L (or equivalent); Physics 264L and 464 (satisfies A) (or Chemistry 310 and either 310L or 
311L), Physics 363 (or Chemistry 311); Physics 364L or equivalent; one of Physics 361, 362, 464(A), or a director-
approved 300-level or above course not including independent studies; Physics 414 and 415; three 200-level or 
higher director-approved elective courses relevant to the biophysics major.

Policy, Journalism and Media Studies
Associate Professor of the Practice Rogerson, Director

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The DeWitt Wallace Center for Media and Democracy offers an interdisciplinary certificate in policy, 

journalism, and media studies (PJMS), which helps to prepare students for careers in journalism and media-
related professions. Through PJMS coursework, students gain a thorough understanding of the role of the press 
in a democracy and engage in courses and internships to learn about the practice of journalism, while mastering 
the broader background of studies in public policy, politics, economics, history, and other liberal arts.

Program Requirements
The policy journalism and media studies certificate is open to all undergraduates. Candidates must complete 

the prescribed combination of six courses, at least four at the 200 level or above. The six courses must include 
three core courses, two of which must be PJMS 410 (capstone) and PJMS 371 (News as a Moral Battleground), 
and a third core practicum course, either PJMS 365S, 366S, or 367S (Video Journalism, Magazine Journalism, 
or News Writing and Reporting); as well as three elective courses from an approved list which can be found at 
dewitt.sanford.duke.edu/courses/. New courses, special topics courses, and independent study courses may also 

http://dewitt.sanford.duke.edu/courses


Policy Journalism and Media Studies (PJMS) 625

be approved as elective courses by the program. Each student also is required to complete an internship in the 
field prior to taking the capstone course (the internship must be approved before it is begun). Only one of the 
electives can originate in the PJMS Program. No more than two courses that are counted toward this certificate 
may satisfy the requirements of any major, minor, or other certificate program. A minimum of three courses must 
be taken by the end of the junior year.

Students should register for the policy journalism and media studies certificate at the Office of the University 
Registrar (or, if they are declaring a major for the first time, through the Pre-Major Advising Center) and also see 
program director Ken Rogerson in the Sanford School of Public Policy.

Courses in Policy Journalism and Media Studies (PJMS)
89S. First Year Seminar: Special Topics in Policy, Journalism and Media Studies. Topics vary. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
112. The Googlization of Knowledge: Information, Ethics, and Technology. EI, R, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Information Science + Studies 112
120. Internship in Media-Related Field. For students enrolled in the Policy Journalism & Media Studies 
certificate program. Field work in media-related organization with pre-approval of the program Chair. Must 
submit approval form in advance, and a brief memo two weeks after internship ends. Director of undergraduate 
studies consent required. Instructor: Rogerson.
135S. Introduction to Audio Documentary. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 135S
264S. Religion & Journalism. CZ, R One course. C-L: see Religion 264S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 264S
290. Special Topics in Policy Journalism & Media Studies. Selected Policy Journalism & Media Studies 
topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Policy Journalism & Media Studies. Selected Policy Journalism & Media 
Studies topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290T. Special Topics Tutorial Journalism & Media Studies. Selected topics tutorial course in 
Journalism and Media Studies. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Half course credit. Instructor: Staff. 
Half course. C-L: Public Policy 291T
291. Internship in Journalism and Media Studies. For students working in journalism or 
communications capacities in the journalism, public agency, political campaign, or other media-oriented group 
under the supervision of a faculty member. Requires a substantive paper (or papers) or project. Satisfactory/
Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
310S. The Short Audio Documentary. ALP, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 310S
311S. Documentary Writing Workshop. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 311S; also 
C-L: English 214S
335. Free Speech: France-USA. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL One course. C-L: see French 335; also C-L: Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 335, Human Rights
352S. Documentary Publishing from Gutenberg to the Web: The Vanishing Point Course. ALP, 
CCI, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 352S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 352S, 
Visual Arts 352S
361S. Algorithms, Journalism and the Public Interest. EI, SS, STS Explores the expanding and 
evolving role of algorithms in the production, dissemination, and consumption of news. Course considers the 
political, economic, cultural, legal, public policy, and ethical implications of algorithmically-driven journalism 
and news consumption. Places algorithmically-driven journalism and news consumption in historical and 
technological context. Instructor: Napoli. One course. C-L: Public Policy 361S
364S. Art of the Interview. R, W An exploration of the role of the interview as a core feature of modern 
American journalism, with focus on its development as a tool of inquiry, a cultural form and news-making event. 
Students will study examples of media coverage and produce projects involving interviews around a common 
subject: the experience of immigration and the immigration debate in America. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Public Policy 364S, Documentary Studies 364S



 Policy Journalism and Media Studies (PJMS)626

365S. Video Journalism. ALP, SS Theories and concepts of television broadcasting; writing and editing for 
electronic media; issues of production. Students will produce a Web portfolio. Approved as a practicum course 
for the Policy, Journalism and Media Studies certificate. Instructor: Owens. One course. C-L: Public Policy 365S, 
Visual and Media Studies 305S, Documentary Studies 367S, Information Science + Studies, Policy Journalism 
and Media Studies Core
366S. Magazine Journalism. SS, W Storytelling techniques of magazine journalism; reporting and 
writing strategies; historical and contemporary writing for magazines in print and digital formats. Students 
develop experience in different kinds of magazine writing. Approved as a practicum course required for the 
Policy, Journalism and Media Studies certificate. Instructor: Graham. One course. C-L: Public Policy 366S, 
Documentary Studies 356S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
367S. News Writing and Reporting. R, SS, W Seminar on reporting and writing news and feature stories. 
Students required to produce news stories based on original reporting and writing, including interviews, use of 
the Internet and electronic databases, public records, and written publications. Written assignments critiqued 
in class; final project. Instructor: Clabby, Rogerson, or Stencel. One course. C-L: Public Policy 367S, Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies Core
371. News as a Moral Battleground. EI, R, SS, W Ethical inquiry into journalism and its effect on public 
discourse. Issues include accuracy, transparency, conflicts of interest and fairness. Topics include coverage 
of national security, government secrecy, plagiarism/fabrication, and trade-offs of anonymous sourcing. 
Instructor: Adair. One course. C-L: Public Policy 371, Study of Ethics 259, Documentary Studies 371, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 371, Documentary Studies, Human Rights
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy. EI, SS, STS The evolution of the Internet and other 
information technologies and the related policies and regulations that have emerged both internationally and 
nationally (in the United States). The tensions surrounding the access to information and the controversies 
about content, such as issues of free speech. Includes an Internet monitoring project designed to encourage 
in-depth analysis in order to place technology and technology policy in their historical evolution and context. 
Explores the contemporary political and social impacts of the Internet and other information technologies. 
Instructor: Rogerson. One course. C-L: Public Policy 372, Political Science 388, Ethics Elective, Information 
Science + Studies
374S. Watchdog Reporting in Politics. EI, W Focus on fundamental reporting and writing techniques 
to cover political news. Review and use public documents and data tools to scrutinize the records, veracity and 
finances of politicians and government officials. Discussions with guest speakers explore ethical issues, such 
as the boundaries of a public official’s private conduct and how politicians and those who report about them 
misinterpret and misrepresent facts. Covers related editorial skills, including ways to set aside personal biases to 
cover political issues fairly. Skills developed, including the use of editorial style guidelines, have wide application 
in journalism and public policy communication. Instructor: Stencel. One course. C-L: Public Policy 357S, 
Political Science 374S, Study of Ethics 374S
375. Journalism in the Age of Data. SS, STS Teaches the tools and techniques used by investigative 
journalists to acquire and analyze data in order to discover story ideas and draw and evaluate conclusions about 
politicians, public policy, broader behavior of public institutions. Students should have basic familiarity with 
journalism concepts, but no specific technical or mathematical skills required. Instructor: Dukes, Bowers. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 343
386S. The Intersection of Politics, Policy, and Media. SS An examination of decision-making at 
intersection of politics, public policy, and media. Draws on real-world and real-time examples and case 
studies, readings, and guest speakers. Issues include: role, power and practice of lobbying, rise of think 
tanks and interest groups as key players, theater of politics and policy, the many faces of media, scandal and 
commodification of outrage, crisis management and mismanagement. Instructor: Schoenfeld. One course. C-L: 
Public Policy 369S
390. Special Topics in Policy Journalism and Media Studies. Selected policy, journalism and media 
studies topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-01. Study Abroad/Away, Duke Program. Study abroad or study away, through a Duke-in-___ 
program, in which the area of study focuses on policy journalism or media studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Policy Journalism and Media Studies (PJMS) 627

390A-02. Study Abroad/Away, non-Duke Program. Study Abroad or Study Away, through a program 
that is not a Duke-in-___ program. The area of academic focus must relate to policy journalism or media 
studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Policy Journalism and Media Studies. Selected policy, journalism and media 
studies topics. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Independent project in an area of Policy Journalism and Media Studies (PJMS), 
under the supervision or sponsorship of a faculty member. Projects must be pre-approved by the supervising 
faculty member, and a PJMS co-chair. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or project containing significant analysis 
and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and chair of policy journalism & media 
studies certificate program required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
397S. Advanced Reporting. W Durham government and community reporting course for students with 
experience in journalism. Assignments will involve covering meetings of the Durham City Council and Board of 
Education and other Durham County boards and commissions, covering civil and criminal trials, and conducting 
interviews with government officials, people affected by government actions, and elected representatives. 
Resources are provided for students to travel throughout Durham County. Prerequisite: Policy, Journalism and 
Media Studies 364S and 367S. Students with journalism experience who do not meet these two prerequisites 
may contact the instructor for permission to enroll. Instructor: Adair. One course. C-L: Public Policy 397S
410. Policy Journalism and Media Studies Capstone Course. R, SS Capstone course for Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies certificate. Course taken after student completes media internship. Designed 
to integrate student’s practical experience with conceptual and theoretical classroom work. Students meet in 
formal course setting to discuss what they have learned, present examples of the work they have accomplished, 
and discuss relevant research, culminating in a final project. Course requires a class presentation about the 
student’s internship and a final project that integrates the internship experience with course content. Open to 
Policy Journalism and Media Studies certificate students only. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Public Policy 410
490. Special Topics in Policy, Journalism, & Media Studies. Selected topics for courses offering 
capstone experiences or advanced research. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Policy Journalism and Media Studies. Selected topics for courses offering 
advanced research opportunities. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
510S. Science and the Media: Narrative Writing about Science, Health and Policy. STS, W One 
course. C-L: see Bioethics and Science Policy 510S; also C-L: Public Policy 510S, Documentary Studies
676. Media and Social Change. CCI, R, SS, STS Media perform crucial connecting links between civil 
society and leadership. Authoritarian regimes or single-party states seeking to suppress formation of civil society 
can be changed drastically when media use changes. This course will examine why and how such processes can 
take place, focusing on Russia, Eastern Europe, and other cases, such as China. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Political Science 619, Public Policy 676, Russian 516

Journalism Practical Core Course Cluster
Documentary Studies
356S. Magazine Journalism
367S. Video Journalism
Policy Journalism & Media Studies
365S. Video Journalism
366S. Magazine Journalism 
367S. News Writing and Reporting
Public Policy
365S. Video Journalism
366S. Magazine Journalism
367S. News Writing and Reporting
Visual and Media Studies
305S. Video Journalism 



 Policy Journalism and Media Studies (PJMS)628

Elective Courses
Art History
537S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies
435S. Chinese Media and Popular Culture: Politics, Ideology, and Social Change
535. Chinese Media and Pop Culture
Computational Media, Arts & Cultures
650S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar
Computer Science
92L. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet
Cultural Anthropology
106S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
213. Cyborgs
Documentary Studies
105S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach
230S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations
264. Introduction to Film Studies
310S. The Short Audio Documentary
English
181. Introduction to Film Studies
310A. The Business of Art and Media
391A. Duke in New York Arts and Media Independent Study
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies
215. Cyborgs
History
125S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach
Information Science + Studies
101L. Technical and Social Analysis of Information and the Internet
294L. Interactive Graphics: Critical Code
435S. Chinese Media and Popular Culture: Politics, Ideology, and Social Change
535. Chinese Media and Pop Culture
565S. New Media, Memory, and the Visual Archive
650S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar
Innovation and Entrepreneurship
373. Intellectual Property: Law, Policy, and Practice
Linguistics
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
Literature
110. Introduction to Film Studies
621S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar
Physical Education
212. Sports Media
Political Science
105S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach
201. Public Opinion
242D. Campaigns and Elections
388. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
435S. Chinese Media and Popular Culture: Politics, Ideology, and Social Change
501S. Politics and Media in the United States
619. Media and Social Change
Public Policy
170S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy
373. Intellectual Property: Law, Policy, and Practice
379S. The First Amendment in the Digital Age
389S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations
415. Servant Leadership in a Democracy
674. Media and Democracy
676. Media and Social Change
Russian
350. Eastern Europe in Transition: Markets, Media, and the Mafia
516. Media and Social Change
Sociology
160. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
221. Eastern Europe in Transition: Markets, Media, and the Mafia
Theater Studies
278. Introduction to Film Studies
Visual Arts
232S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations



Political Science (POLSCI) 629

242L. Interactive Graphics: Critical Code
Visual and Media Studies
106S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach
170. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4)
224S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations
289. Introduction to Film Studies
318. Eastern Europe in Transition: Markets, Media, and the Mafia
397L. Interactive Graphics: Critical Code
561S. Computational Media, Arts & Cultures Proseminar
563. Media and Democracy
565S. New Media, Memory, and the Visual Archive

Polish
For courses in Polish, see Slavic and Eurasian Studies on page 756. 

Political Science
Professor Vanberg, Chair; Professor Wibbels, Associate Chair; Professor Munger, Director of Undergraduate 
Studies; Professors Aldrich, Beardsley, Beramendi, deMarchi, Feaver, Gillespie, Grieco, Hillygus, Jentleson (pub-
lic policy), Kelley (public policy), Kitschelt, Knight, Krishna (public policy), Kuran (economics), Liu (Asian & Mid-
dle Eastern Studies), Malesky, Manion, McClain, McCubbins, Munger, Niou, Price, Remmer, Rohde, Rosenberg 
(philosophy), Siegel (law), Vanberg, and Wibbels; Associate Professors Goss (public policy), Hacohen (history), 
Haynie, Johnston, Kirshner, Leventoglu, Mullin (environmental science), Siegel, and White; Assistant Profes-
sors Barnes (public policy), Bermeo (public policy), Carnes (public policy), Fresh, Johnson (public policy), Jardi-
na, Rose (public policy), and Rousseliere; Professors Emeriti Fish, Grant, Holsti, Hough, Horowitz (law), Johns, 
Lange, McKean, Mickiewicz (public policy), Paletz, Spragens, and Ward; Research Professors Emeriti Brennan, 
Keech, and Soskice; Adjunct Professors Engstrom, MacKuen, and Stimson; Adjunct Associate Professor Kessler; 
Associate Professors of the Practice Charney (public policy) and Maghraoui

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Courses in political science for undergraduates are offered in six subfields: political institutions; political 

economy; security, peace and conflict; political behavior and identity; political methodology; and political 
philosophy. More information on courses and subfields is found at https://polisci.duke.edu/undergraduate. The 
Areas of Knowledge designation is followed by the relevant curriculum codes. Following the course descriptions, 
you will find information on internships, and requirements for the major, minor, and honors. 

Courses in Political Science (POLSCI)

Introductory Courses
The following courses introduce the study of political science. Courses numbered 89S and 110 through 

190 serve as introductions to the discipline. Students ordinarily will take at least one of these courses before 
proceeding to more advanced courses. Some advanced courses may require a particular introductory course as a 
prerequisite. 
20. American Government and Politics. Credit for Advanced Placement on the basis of the College Board 
examination in American government and politics. Does not satisfy course requirements of the political science 
major. One course.
21. Comparative Government and Politics. Credit for Advanced Placement on the basis of the College 
Board examination in comparative government and politics. Does not satisfy course requirements of the political 
science major. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
90S. Special Topics in Political Science. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Political Science. SS Political science seeks to describe and understand political 
phenomena, and to explore their ethical and normative dimensions. Course provides a broad introduction to 
the range of topics covered in political science, from authoritarian to democratic politics, from local governance 
to international relations, from formal rules and institutions to the psychology and behavior of individuals who 
participate in political processes. Instructor: Staff. One course.

https://polisci.duke.edu/undergraduate


 Political Science (POLSCI)630

102. The Science of Politics. SS Why and how is political science a science? This course introduces students 
to the scientific study of the political world. Students are introduced to a broad set of questions and topics that 
political scientists work on. Students will learn how political scientists build theories, generate hypotheses, and 
test hypotheses with quantitative and qualitative data. And students will have an opportunity to apply their 
knowledge as political scientists do—by critiquing scientific research; proposing and testing original hypotheses; 
and using theory and evidence from the class as a basis for making policy recommendations. Instructor: Aldrich, 
Fresh. One course.
105S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach. ALP, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 105S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 106S, History 125S, Public Policy 170S, Visual and 
Media Studies 106S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
108. Introduction to African Studies (DS3 or DS4). ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 103; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 105, History 129, International Comparative 
Studies 110
110. Comparative Approaches to Global Issues. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 195; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 195, History 103, Sociology 195, Gender, Sexuality, 
and Feminist Studies 195, Marxism and Society
114. From Voting to Protests: Introduction to Political Attitudes, Groups and Behaviors. CCI, 
SS Covers basic core concepts for understanding political behavior—attitudes, beliefs, and actions of the general 
public in political life—and the development and consequences of racial, ethnic, and other types of (politically 
relevant) identities. Broadly comparative approach, looking at publics throughout the world. Special focus 
on political behavior and identities in democracies, where behavior is consequential in ordinary workings of 
politics. Also examines extraordinary political behavior, such as participation in protests, riots, and civil wars. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
115. Rules of Power: How Institutions Shape What Politics Deliver. SS Formation of states out of 
tribal societies; predatory and self-limiting rules; rule of law; forms of non-democratic political organization: 
military, personal, single party rule; democracy and transitions to democracy; institutional components of 
democratic rule: presidential and parliamentary executives; legislatures and their task structures (debate, 
oversight, law preparation, budgeting); electoral laws and political parties; veto-institutions: judicial control, 
federal delegation of authority to political subsidiaries; consequences of institutional choice: economic 
performance, political regime support. Instructor: Staff. One course.
116D. The American Political System. SS Same as Political Science 116 except instruction is provided in 
two lectures and one small discussion meeting each week. Instructor: Staff. One course.
120. The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 101
120D. The Challenges of Living an Ethical Life. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 101D; also 
C-L: Philosophy 219D
125D. Introduction to Global Development: Politics, Policy and Practice. CCI, SS Introduces 
intellectual tools for understanding why development varies across the globe and practical tools for designing 
and evaluating foreign aid programs. Course focuses on foundations for sustained development, including 
geography, historical legacies, technological innovation and political institutions, and practical challenges 
associated with aid programming aimed at promoting development. Also explores how international donors 
work, what constitutes a good development program, and how to evaluate whether a development project 
“works.” Instructor: Wibbels. One course.
140S. Empires in Modern European History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 140S; also C-L: 
Sociology 148S, Cultural Anthropology 140S
145. Introduction to Political Economy. EI, SS Introduction to history of political economy. Three 
components: (1) history of economic thought as outgrowth of moral philosophy; (2) microeconomics and 
price theory; (3) macroeconomics and monetary policy. Intended as an economics course for non-majors. No 
prerequisite except high school mathematics. Does not count toward Economics major or minor. Instructor: 
Munger. One course. C-L: Economics 119, Markets and Management Studies, Energy and the Environment
146. Politics and Economics. SS Politics is about choices that affect the distribution of gains and losses, 
and about societal and political conflicts surrounding them. Course analyzes how political and economic forces 



Political Science (POLSCI) 631

shape: (1) Historical origins, such as the industrial revolution, slavery, and the birth of the modern welfare state; 
(2) Macro-economic policies, such as the taxation of capital, public spending and debt; and (3) Redistributive 
policies, such as welfare programs, unemployment and health insurance, and the minimum wage. Instructor: 
Stegmueller. One course.
150FS. Citizenship, Patriotism, & Identity. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 150FS; also 
C-L: Public Policy 167FS
159. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 148; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 244, Environment 147, Jewish Studies 148, Public 
Policy 178, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 148, Ethics Electives, Islamic Studies, Human 
Rights
160D. Introduction to Security, Peace and Conflict. CCI, SS Same as Political Science 160 except 
instruction is provided in two lectures and one small discussion meeting each week. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 166D
160S. Introduction to Security, Peace and Conflict. CCI, SS The theory and practice of international 
politics and foreign policy; analysis of the various elements of national power and its impact on differing world 
views and foreign policy behavior, the instruments of foreign policy, and the controls of state/nation behavior 
across different historical periods and from different national and analytical perspectives. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
170FS. Liberty and Equality: Ancient and Modern Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 170FS; also C-L: Study of Ethics 170FS
171FS. Political Polarization in the US: Causes and Consequences. SS Examines various measures of 
the degree of polarization in the public and in Congress, explores the causes of observed changes in polarization 
over time, and considers what consequences these changes have had for the practice of electoral politics and the 
conduct of government. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Rohde. One course.
172FS. Racial Attitudes and Racial Politics in the United States. CCI, EI, SS Course considers the 
different conceptions and definitions of racial attitudes and racial prejudice in the United States. Compares 
across the disciplines of social psychology, sociology, and political science, acknowledging debates about both 
the sources and consequences of these attitudes. Focuses on how in the present day, different theories lead 
to different understanding of racial conflict and its political consequences. Discusses how racial attitudes, 
prejudice, and conflict may be mitigated in political world. Open only to students in the Focus Program. 
Department consent required. Instructor: Jardina. One course.
175. Introduction to Political Philosophy. EI, SS An intensive comparative examination of the nature and 
enduring problems of political philosophy through the confrontation, interpretation, and normative assessment 
of classic texts from the Greek polis to the present. Selected theorists and their arguments and beliefs within the 
Western political tradition concerning justice, the good life, freedom, community, power, authority, and others. 
Careful attention to the ways argument and rhetoric operate in texts of political philosophy, as well as diverse 
modes of interpretation. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
175D. Introduction to Political Philosophy. EI, SS Same as Political Science 175 except instruction is 
provided in two lectures and one small discussion meeting each week. An intensive comparative examination 
of the nature and enduring problems of political philosophy through the confrontation, interpretation, and 
normative assessment of classic texts from the Greek polis to the present. Selected theorists and their arguments 
and beliefs within the Western political tradition concerning justice, the good life, freedom, community, 
power, authority, and others. Careful attention to the ways argument and rhetoric operate in texts of political 
philosophy, as well as diverse modes of interpretation. Instructor: Kirshner. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
175FS. Freedom and Responsibility. EI, SS, W Conflicting visions of freedom and responsibility that 
characterize the modern world; the possibility of leading ethical lives in the face of conflicting demands that 
a complex vision of the good engenders. Readings include Luther, Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau, Marx, Kant, 
and Jack London. Course aims to be an intense introduction to Western philosophical ideas of freedom and 
responsibility. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Gillespie. 
One course. C-L: Philosophy 123FS, Ethics Elective



 Political Science (POLSCI)632

176FS. Human Rights and World Politics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 129FS; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 128FS, Public Policy 181FS, Human Rights
180FS. Hierarchy and Spontaneous Order: The Nature of Freedom in Political and Economic 
Organizations (C-N). EI, SS, W Course examines themes that emerge from the classics of political thought 
through contemporary work in the analytic social science tradition. Employs the tools of game theory to consider 
simple models of social and political interaction that shed light on the emergence of formal and informal 
institutions that govern individual behavior, and the role of these institutions in securing individual freedom. 
Reliance on analytic models is what differentiates this course from a historical or philosophical inquiry. Open 
only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Vanberg. One course.
185FS. The Politics of Language. SS One course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 215FS; also C-L: 
Linguistics 213FS, International Comparative Studies 228FS
187FS. American Democracy: Two Centuries of Creating Institutions to Achieve its Principles. 
CZ, SS Analysis of American democracy: rooted in stirring sentences (“all men are created equal.”), yet 
knowingly designed imperfectly. How have American political institutions been created and recreated? 
Is “a more perfect union” possible or illusory? How can we reconcile politics that often expands political 
opportunities for citizens, yet leads politicians to a shutdown they claim they did not want? Open only to 
students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Aldrich. One course. C-L: Study of 
Ethics 187FS
188FS. American Perspectives on Citizenship. EI, SS An overview of American perspectives on 
citizenship. Explores ongoing controversies about the influence of liberalism and republicanism on American 
conceptions of citizenship, whether American individualism threatens civic duty, whether civil disobedience is 
justified, whether there are certain values and experiences that all American citizens should share, and whether 
national identities are relevant in an increasingly global world. Open only to students in the Focus Program. 
Department consent required. Instructor: Hanagan. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 188FS
189FS. Introduction to Machine Learning and Legislative Behavior. R, SS Introduction to using 
machine learning techniques to model behavior in legislatures. Focus on two canonical activities in legislatures. 
Students will build predictive models of voting in the US Congress using text as data to connect the content 
of bills to votes and will look outside the United States and model bargaining and coalition formation in 
proportional representation systems. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent 
required. Instructor: Demarchi. One course.
190. Special Topics in Political Science. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Special Topics in the Focus Program. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Topics differ 
by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Political Science. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S-1. Special Topics in Political Science. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.
195FS. Freedom and Moral Obligation. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 124FS

Study Abroad Courses
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Political Science. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
213SA. Women and Gender in the Middle East. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 303SA; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 304SA
214SA. Media and Power in Washington. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 238SA
240SA. Theory and Practice: People, Places and Policy Cases. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 
217SA
241SA. Whose Democracy? Participation and Public Policy in the United States. SS One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 261SA



Political Science (POLSCI) 633

260A. Frontier City Berlin: Facing History’s Great Challenges. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see German 
366A; also C-L: Public Policy 210A, History 334A
280A. Duke Summer Program: London. CCI, SS Media and Politics in Britain. Instructor: Staff. Two 
courses. C-L: International Comparative Studies
282A. Duke Summer Program: Oxford. CCI, SS Political System of Modern Britain. Open only to 
students in the Duke Summer Program: Oxford. Instructor: Staff. Two courses. C-L: History 399A, International 
Comparative Studies
283A. Duke Summer/Semester Program: Madrid. CCI, SS Instructor: Staff. One course.
284A. Duke Semester Program: Ecuador. CCI, SS Instructor: Staff. One course.
285A. Duke Summer/Semester Program: St. Petersburg, Russia. CCI, SS Permission of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
286A. Duke Summer/Semester Program: France. CCI, FL, SS Instructor: Staff. One course.
287A. Duke Semester Program: Venice. CCI, SS Topics differ by section. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Political Science. Topics 
differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293A. Research Independent Study on Contemporary China. R Research and field studies culminating 
in a paper approved and supervised by the resident director of the Duke in China program. Includes field trips 
on cultural and societal changes in contemporary China. Offered only in the Duke in China Program. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
295A. Environmental Policy in Europe: Duke in Berlin. CCI, SS Economic concepts and environmental 
policies with their application to selected environmental issues in Western and Eastern Europe, transboundary 
pollution problems, and the role of the European Community. Taught by a leading German expert in the 
Duke-in-Berlin fall semester program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 201A, German 320A, 
International Comparative Studies
296A. Germany Today: A European Superpower? Duke-in-Berlin. CCI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see 
German 359A; also C-L: History 266A, International Comparative Studies
297A. Political Philosophy of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 237A; also 
C-L: Public Policy 204A, Economics 303A
298A. Themes in Chinese Culture and History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
343A; also C-L: History 224A, International Comparative Studies
320A. Globalization and Deglobalization. FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 350A; also C-L: Economics 
320A, Public Policy 356A, International Comparative Studies 363A
325A. The Economic and Political History of the European Union. CCI, CZ, FL, SS One course. C-L: 
see French 351A; also C-L: Public Policy 351A, History 331A, Economics 330A
395A. Religion, Security and Global Citizenship in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 326A; also C-L: Religion 371A, International Comparative Studies 362A, Public 
Policy 339A

Other Undergraduate Courses
201. Public Opinion. EI, SS Examines nature and role of public opinion in American democracy, providing 
broad-based introduction to dynamics of citizens’ social and political attitudes in contemporary United States. 
Goal of course is to help students arrive at a more comprehensive understanding of forces that shape beliefs, 
attitudes, and opinions of American public, the means by which those views are publicly expressed, and the 
influence of those opinions on policy outcomes. Instructor: Hillygus. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and 
Media
203. Women and the Political Process. R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 225



 Political Science (POLSCI)634

205. Introduction to Racial and Ethnic Minorities in American Politics. CCI, SS The politics of four 
of the United States principal racial minority groups—blacks, Latinos, Asians, and American Indians. Instructor: 
McClain. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 257, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 205, Human Rights
206. American Values, Institutions, and Culture. CCI, SS Introduction to American political theory and 
institutional development from European settlement to Progressive Era; origins and evolution of key political 
institutions, including congress, federalism, the presidency, the party system, and Supreme Court; ways in which 
these institutions resolve collective action problems; influence of competing political ideologies—especially, 
liberalism, puritanism, republicanism—on American political development; role of political ideologies and 
institutions in re-enforcing and resisting slavery, as well as racial and gender inequality. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
211. Democracy: Ancient and Modern. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 275; also 
C-L: History 234, Study of Ethics 275
212. The American Presidency. EI, SS The American presidency and its influence on American government 
and politics across various historical periods. The role of the presidency as it relates to important ethical and 
political issues and controversies at various times in American political history. Comparison with executive 
offices in various countries. Instructor: Staff. One course.
213. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Education 201; also C-L: Public Policy 203, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 201
213S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Education 201S; also C-L: Public Policy 206S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 201S, Human Rights
217. Discovering Game Theory: Social Complexity and Strategic Interdependence. QS, SS Strategy 
is all around you: In sports, the economy, law, politics, and your own social interactions. In this course, you will 
explore one of the foundational tools that social scientists use to analyze the complexity of strategic interactions: 
Game Theory. To do so, the course employs a highly interactive learning environment, in which you and your 
peers engage in strategic interactions that illustrate fundamental social dilemmas. In taking this course, you will 
gain a new analytical perspective into the complexity of social phenomena, and develop a solid foundation for 
additional course work in social science. Instructor: Abdulkadiroglu, Vanberg. One course. C-L: Economics 362, 
Duke Center for Interdisciplinary Decison Sciences 201
219. Comparative Government and Politics: Selected Countries. CCI, SS Special topics course 
treating the evolution and function of various national political systems at different stages of their historical and 
political development. The focus changes depending upon which nations and peoples are analyzed. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
221. South Africa: Past and Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 214; also C-L: History 208, Public Policy 214, International Comparative Studies, Human Rights
222. The Arab Youths Revolution. CCI, EI, SS Examines mass protest movements that topple autocratic 
leaders in the Arab World. Studies causes, dynamics, and pattern of authoritarian breakdown and transition 
in Tunisia, Egypt, Libya, Yemen and Syria. Questions include: What is driving sudden protest movements? 
Why now? How important is role of youths and new technologies of communication? What does religion have 
to do with these movements? Why have Arab republics been more vulnerable? Are Arab monarchies (Jordan, 
Morocco, and Saudi Arabia) really immune? Instructor: Maghraoui. One course.
224. Inequality and Politics. SS Inequality, understood as the ultimate allocation of scarce resources in 
society, plays an important role in way democratic societies work. Course will review the fundamental political 
theory debates about the relationship between inequality and politics; understanding of how politics shapes 
the distributions of income and wealth in contemporary democracies; and functioning of democratic polities 
at different levels of development. Examines its influence on citizens’ political engagement, the extent to which 
political participation works, and various forms of conflict and political (dis)integration. Instructor: Beramendi. 
One course.
225S. Research in International Policy Issues. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 237S



Political Science (POLSCI) 635

227. Ethnic Conflict. CCI, R, SS An examination of ethnic conflict and discrimination in the United States, 
Africa, Europe, and Asia. Theories of ethnic identify formation, ethnic conflict, the role of ethnicity in politics, 
and the economics of discrimination. How ethnic conflict is likely to change in the next few decades. The 
impact of a freer trade environment and the increasing integration of the world economy on ethnic conflict. The 
effectiveness of international institutions like the United Nations and NATO in preventing the reoccurrence of 
tragedies like Rwanda. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 322, Public Policy 
239
228. Politics of Authoritarian Regimes. CCI, R, SS Examine the variety of ways in which authoritarian 
regimes operate. Study the emergence and persistence of authoritarian regimes, the institutions they adopt, 
leadership change, government/opposition relations, their potential for democratic transition as well as the 
theories that explain these outcomes. Instructor: Leventoglu. One course. C-L: Public Policy 228, International 
Comparative Studies
229. Institutions and Self Governance. CCI, CZ, SS Study the history and development of institutions 
in self-governing communities and societies to gain a deeper understanding of the need for creating and 
maintaining institutions to resolve specific collection action problems and to achieve social security, political 
stability and economic prosperity in general for a community. Types of institutions include: mutual-aid 
associations such as friendly societies in the West and community compacts in the East, Western credit union 
system and Chinese granary systems, credit and money raising schemes, public security and social control 
measures, conflict resolution and dispute settlement methods, and collective decision making methods. 
Instructor: Niou. One course.
230. Networks in a Globalizing World. R, SS Network perspective on understanding politics; focus on 
aspects of security, peace, and conflict as seen from a global network perspective; focus on major concepts of 
network analysis: nodes, links, cliques, centrality, as well as the dynamics of the spread of political phenomena 
through networks. Students will learn to conduct studies of politics that use network concepts and data. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
231D. Introduction to Tools of Political Risk Analysis. SS This course explores the impact of national 
and subnational government institutions on international business strategy. The course is designed around 
the theme of political risk analysis, approaching the topic from two perspectives: country and individual firm. 
Political risk is a type of risk faced by investors, that political decisions, events, or conditions will significantly 
affect the profitability of a business actor or the expected value of a given economic action. In this course, 
students will learn tools for measuring and assessing political risk, as well as how smart leaders can make 
intelligent business strategy decisions in these environments. Instructor: Malesky. One course.
232. Introduction to Terrorism. CCI, SS Nature of terrorist organizations and government responses 
to them. Includes analysis of different aspects of terrorism: historical, social, cultural, economic, political, 
religious context; determinants of terrorism at state and individual level; organizational structure of terrorist 
groups’ weapons and tactics; mobilization and recruitment within terror networks; terrorist finance; methods of 
counterterrorism. Details different methods of study of terrorism. Instructor: Siegel. One course.
233. Nuclear Weapons: US Foreign Policy and the Challenges of Global Proliferation. SS, 
STS Implication of nuclear weapons to U.S. foreign policy and international politics. Topics include basic 
science of nuclear fission and fusion, history of nuclear proliferation, theory of nuclear deterrence, evolution 
of U.S. nuclear posture during and after Cold War, and case studies of other nuclear proliferation with detailed 
coverage of North Korea and Iran. Emphasis in readings and assignments will be placed on being able to 
understand how these weapons apply to theories of international relations and foreign policy and on being able 
to make causal inferences regarding their importance. Instructor: Beardsley. One course.
234D. Are Things Getting Better? The Question of Progress in World Affairs. R, SS, W Course 
explores a fundamental question for students of world affairs across several disciplines: are governments and 
their respective societies making progress in building a more peaceful, democratic, and prosperous global 
order? Objectives: students will learn how debate among scholars on a fundamental question contributes to 
the constitution and development of several disciplines; how scholars undertake debates and thus be better 
prepared to assess and contribute to them; and how to frame research questions and to write a research paper 
that ties into and contributes to a larger inter-disciplinary dialogue. Instructor: Grieco. One course. C-L: Public 
Policy 233D, International Comparative Studies 252D



 Political Science (POLSCI)636

235S. Comparative Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, EI, SS DukeImmerse Seminar. A 
comparative examination and analysis of urban governance in South Africa and the United States. Examines 
potential consequences of persistent racial and class disparities for housing and neighborhoods, public health, 
education, community infrastructure, and general economic and social development. Specific attention to 
how the physical layout, government structures, politics, culture, and the civil society of cities and urban areas 
may both promote and hinder human development and social justice. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Haynie and Lawrence. One course. C-L: Public Policy 285S, International Comparative Studies 213S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 235S, African & African American Studies 234S
236S. Advanced Research Seminar in Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, R, SS, 
W DukeImmerse Seminar. Advanced research and writing seminar. Participants produce a 30-40 page research 
paper based on field work and archival research experiences in Durham and an approved South African 
city. Includes tutorials in research design and comparative research methods. There is a required field work 
component of the course which entails a two-week trip to South Africa. Students will collect data, do interviews, 
visit municipals offices, and or spend time at NGOs in Pietermaritzburg. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Haynie and Lawrence. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 236S, African & 
African American Studies 237S, Human Rights
237. Religion and Foreign Policy. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Examines ways in which religious ideas, identities, 
and actors impact the foreign policy actions of states. Topics include just war theory, religious nationalism, 
public opinion, elites, and faith-based approaches to peacebuilding. Focus on theory as well as comparisons 
of contemporary case studies. Cases include United States, Turkey, India, Israel, Iran, and Russia and explore 
various elements of the five major world religions. Major assignments: ongoing blog, policy brief, and final 
group video project. Instructor: Alexander. One course.
238. Racial Attitudes, Racial Prejudice, and Racial Politics. CCI, EI, SS Course delves into work from 
sociology, social psychology, and political science to explore the development of racial attitudes, stereotypes, and 
prejudice. Consideration of the way race matters for attitudes and behavior among all racial and ethnic group 
members and how racial attitudes have changed over time, corresponding to massive social, legal, and political 
changes in the United States. Examines how individual racial attitudes affect political outcomes, how they relate 
to individual political preferences, and how they have influenced voting behavior historically and in the present 
day. Not open to students who have taken Political Science 172FS. Instructor: Jardina. One course. C-L: African 
& African American Studies 239
239S. Political Communication in a Changing Media Environment. R, SS Examination of interaction 
between citizens, media and political actors in today’s fragmented information environment. Topics include 
evolution of political communication and media, emergence of new communication technologies, changes 
in campaign communication strategy, nature of news, theories of attitude formation and change, and role 
of political communications in campaigns and elections. Focus on implications of changing information 
environment for political communication strategies and for citizen knowledge and engagement in democratic 
process. Instructor: Hillygus. One course.
240. Political Psychology. CCI, SS How individuals interact with their political environment and with 
other individuals and groups. Theories and findings from both disciplines to gain deeper insights into political 
processes and decisions. Likely topics include individuals’ political attitudes, decisions and judgments. Other 
likely topics include theories of how people cooperate with each other and how groups come into conflict with 
each other, psychological approaches to analyzing political leaders and/or the way members of different cultures 
process political information. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Psychology 225
242D. Campaigns and Elections. SS The campaign process, voting and elections in the United States, with 
emphasis on the varying role of media in campaigns. The nomination and election process; focus on the critical 
evaluation of various empirical models of voting behavior in presidential and congressional elections and the 
impact of election outcomes on the content and direction of public policy in various historical eras in American 
politics. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media
244S. Activism & Christianity in Modern America. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Religion 238S; 
also C-L: Study of Ethics 238S, African & African American Studies 238S
245. American Constitutional Development and Interpretation I: The Constitutional Structure. 
EI, SS Introduction to primary themes of American constitutional structure (judicial review, democracy, 



Political Science (POLSCI) 637

federalism, and separation of powers), their shaping and reshaping through cultural conflict over course of 
American history, and basic methods of constitutional interpretation (text, structure, history, precedent, 
consequences, identity, and aspirationalism). Special focus on relationships among constitutional text, judicial 
doctrine, and constitutional interpretation outside the courts. Instructor: Siegel. One course. C-L: Public Policy 
251
246. American Constitutional Development and Interpretation II: Individual Rights. EI, 
SS Historical, political, and doctrinal introduction to the primary themes of constitutional protection of 
individual rights in the United States: judicial review, state action, incorporation, fundamental rights (e.g., 
marriage, contraception, abortion, and speech), and equal citizenship (i.e., discrimination on the basis of race, 
sex, and sexual orientation). Special emphasis on: (1) the shaping and reshaping of constitutional rights through 
cultural and political conflict; (2) basic methods of constitutional interpretation and (3) relationships among 
constitutional text, judicial doctrine, and robust practices of constitutional interpretation outside the courts. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 247
248. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 240; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 242, Literature 249, Visual and Media Studies 214, 
International Comparative Studies 265
248S. Games and Culture: Gateway to the Study of Games. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 240S; also C-L: Literature 249S, International Comparative Studies 265S, Cultural 
Anthropology 440S, Visual and Media Studies 214S, Information Science + Studies 242S, Information Science + 
Studies
250. The Politics of International Economic Relations: America in the World Economy. CCI, 
SS Introduction to politics of international economic relations through an examination of persistent major 
debates and current events in world politics and global economy. Topics include politics of trade; politics of 
money and finance; foreign direct investment, multinational corporations, and global value chains; politics 
of foreign aid and economic development; and corporate social responsibility in a global economy. Examines 
how material interests, historical and socio-political context, and institutions at domestic and international 
level shape a country’s foreign economic policies. Special focus on U.S. foreign economic policy in comparative 
perspective. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 240, Markets and Management Studies
251S. Relations between Industrialized and Developing Countries. SS One course. C-L: see Public 
Policy 295S
252. Life Within Capitalism: A History of its Values, Measures and Struggles. CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 249; also C-L: Study of Ethics 271, Economics 270, History 284
253. Christian Ethics and Modern Society. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 220; also C-L: 
Religion 254
253S. Christian Ethics and Modern Society. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 220S; also 
C-L: Religion 354S
255. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-
2015. R, SS Introduction to the history and key issues in U.S. antitrust from the beginning of federal antitrust 
legislation in 1890 through today, with special emphasis on how politics and economics of antitrust have been 
intertwined with the position of the United States in the world economy. Focuses on antitrust law—which 
authorizes interventions against cartels, monopolies, and anti-competitive conduct, with the goal of constraining 
the accumulation and abuse of economic power—as one of the key instruments governments have to shape 
the structure and distribution of benefits of a market economy. Field trip to Washington, DC to meet with U.S. 
antitrust enforcement agencies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 252, Public Policy 254, Study of 
Ethics 255, Markets and Management Studies, Ethics Elective
257. Latin American Wars of Independence. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 264; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 264, International Comparative Studies 232, Latin American Studies
258D. From Machine Learning to Ethnography: Puzzles and Approaches to International 
Development. CCI, SS This is an introductory course in applied social science that examines policy issues in 
developing countries, with a focus on applied research and statistical methods. The objectives of the course are 
threefold: 1) to introduce students to a range of topics and puzzles in international development; 2) to introduce 



 Political Science (POLSCI)638

the broad range of research methods that social scientists use to rigorously study development; and 3) to apply 
those tools to topics and data that you care about. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 241D
262. The Holocaust. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 297; also C-L: Jewish Studies 342, 
Religion 342, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 297, Human Rights
263. The Political History of Modern Architecture: From Revolution through Neoliberalism. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 284; also C-L: History 263, Public Policy 287
264S. Democratic Erosion. SS The course is divided into two broad modules. The first module begins by 
defining democracy and democratic erosion, and then surveys six substantive themes. Each of the first five 
substantive themes addresses one of the causes, symptoms, and/or consequences of democratic erosion; the 
sixth—resistance—explores mechanisms for defending democracy from the threat of erosion. In the second 
module, regional or country case studies are discussed in greater depth. We conclude by returning to the case of 
the US and our own unique political moment. Instructor: Staff. One course.
265S. Introduction to American Political Thought. EI, SS Basic elements of the American political 
tradition examined through a critical analysis of the ethical and political issues and controversies that developed 
from its historical English roots to the present day. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
268. Politics and Literature. ALP, EI, SS The enduring questions of ethical and political issues and 
controversies as expressed in political philosophy and politics and as illustrated in literature. Comparative 
historical, literary, and philosophical analysis. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
270. Ambition and Politics. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W A theoretical examination of the role of ambition in 
politics, including works by or on Homer, Plato, Plutarch, Machiavelli, Shakespeare, Tocqueville, Nietzsche, and 
Hitler. Instructor: Gillespie. One course.
272. Human Rights in Theory and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, SS The nature and value of human rights; 
examining some major debates over their status and meaning and assessing the role which the idea of human 
rights has played in changing lives, practices, and institutions. Questions considered include: whether 
commitments to human rights depend on a belief in moral truth; whether the idea of universal human rights 
makes sense in a culturally diverse world; and what forms of social action are most likely to achieve respect for 
human rights. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 231, Philosophy 262, International Comparative 
Studies 272, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 262, Human Rights, Documentary Studies, 
Ethics Elective, Global Health
273. The Middle East Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 
273; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 218, Documentary Studies 274
275. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals. CCI, EI, SS Analysis of liberalism, 
conservatism, socialism, and their diverse conceptions of justice, freedom, community, and equality. 
Exploration of how these political philosophies interpret various social, religious, and political issues. The 
origins of these ideologies in early modern European thought. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 275, Ethics Elective
275S. Left, Right, and Center: Competing Political Ideals. CCI, EI, SS Analysis of liberalism, 
conservatism, socialism, and their diverse conceptions of justice, freedom, community, and equality. 
Exploration of how these political philosophies interpret various social, religious, and political issues. The 
origins of these ideologies in early modern European thought. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 275S, Ethics Elective
276. Contemporary Documentary Film: Filmmakers and the Full Frame Documentary Film 
Festival. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 264; also C-L: Documentary Studies 
270, Public Policy 374, Arts & Sciences IDEAS themes and University Course 206
277D. The Ethics of War: Self-Defense, Humanitarian Intervention, Terrorism and Law. EI, 
SS Examines ethical questions of war: 1) when are you justified in taking up arms and killing others?; 2) what 
limits, if any, does morality place on how wars can be prosecuted?; 3) what is required of combatants in the 
aftermath of conflict?; 4) how do the existence of international laws and institutions affect our answers to 
these questions? Will also consider the ethical dilemmas raised by the following issues: preemptive invasions, 
terrorism, cyber and nuclear weapons, and unmanned drones. Readings include classic and modern works of 



Political Science (POLSCI) 639

just war theory. Instructor: Kirshner. One course.
278. Roman Political Thought and Its Modern Legacy. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 278; also C-L: History 262, Study of Ethics 276
279. Professionalization and the Job Search. What will you do with your Duke political science degree? 
This course will prepare you for your (professional) life after leaving Duke, equipping you with the knowledge, 
tools, and confidence to thrive in your post-Duke career. The class is tailored for those interested in pursuing 
internships offered in the following summer. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
290D. Special Topics in Political Science. Special topics in political science with discussion. Instructor: 
Munger. One course.
291-1. Sophomore/Junior Independent Study Political Theory. Individual non-research directed 
study in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member. Offered only in areas of study not 
otherwise provided in department course offerings, and with the direct approval and sponsorship of a faculty 
member. Will not generally be offered unless student has first established an extensive record of work with the 
faculty member. Written permission of faculty member, and detailed description of course of directed study, 
required before contacting the Director of Undergraduate Studies for permission number. Fulfills a political 
theory course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291-2. Sophomore/Junior Independent Study Political Institutions. Same as Political Science 291-1 
except fulfills a political institutions course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291-3. Sophomore/Junior Independent Study Security Peace and Conflict. Same as Political Science 
291-1 except fulfills a security, peace and conflict course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291-4. Sophomore/Junior Independent Study Political Behavior and Identities. Same as Political 
Science 291-1 except fulfills a political behavior and identities course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291-5. Sophomore/Junior Independent Study Political Methodology. Same as Political Science 291-1 
except fulfills a political methodology course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291-6. Sophomore/Junior Independent Study Political Economy. Same as Political Science 291-1 
except fulfills a political economy course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
292-1. Internship. Open to students engaging in practical or governmental work experience during the 
summer or a regular semester. A faculty member in the department will supervise a program of study related to 
the work experience, including a substantive paper on a politics-related topic, containing significant analysis and 
interpretation. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
292-2. Internship. See Political Science 292-1. Consent of director of undergraduate studies required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
294A. Political Economy of Immigration. CCI, SS The regulation of labour immigration is among the 
most important and controversial public policy issues in high-income countries. Many countries in Europe and 
North America, including the UK and the US, have experienced very rapid increases in labour immigration over 
the past 20 years. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Staff. Two courses. C-L: Economics 434A, Public 
Policy 355A, Sociology 294A
301S. Illiberal Nondemocracies: Focus on Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 388S; also C-L: History 331S, International Comparative Studies 346S, Public 
Policy 317S
303D. Religion, Restrictions, and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 301D; also C-L: 
Jewish Studies 301D, Public Policy 313D, Study of Ethics 303D, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 301D
305S. Black Politics. SS Course focuses on the evolution, nature, and role of African-Americans within 
the American political system. The concern is with African Americans as actors, creators and initiators in the 
political process. Beginning with an exploration of the historical antecedents of blackness in America, we will 
explore how the black experience in America has shaped the American political system (specifically public 
opinion, political institutions, political behavior, and salient public policy debates) and how black Americans 
have come to understand their position within the American political system. Instructor: White. One course. 
C-L: African & African American Studies 304S



 Political Science (POLSCI)640

308. Islam and the State: Political Economy of Governance in the Middle East. CCI, CZ, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see Economics 326; also C-L: Islamic Studies
310. Political Analysis for Public Policy-Making. SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 301
311. Political Polarization in America: Causes and Consequences. SS Examines various conceptions 
of polarization; forces that led to recent apparent rise in polarization; the consequences of polarization for 
governance, civil discourse, political conflict. Instructor: Rohde. One course.
313S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 
332S; also C-L: Sociology 323S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 313S, Human Rights
315S. Political Economy of Financial Crises. SS Exploration of the political economy of financial crises 
with central theoretical emphasis on the role of ideas, institutions, and interests. Addresses causes of banking, 
currency and debt crises as well as their political consequences--both national and international. Geographical 
and historical coverage will be relatively broad, spanning historical cycles of financial crisis as well as specific 
boom and bust episodes involving Latin America, Asia, the United States, and countries of the Eurozone. No 
prerequisites. Instructor: Remmer. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 307S, Markets and 
Management Studies
316. American Political Parties. SS Introduction to the American party system. Social choice, structural-
functionalism, and systems theory: why parties might be a necessary component of advanced industrial 
societies. Comparison of different social settings (ethnic, religious, class divisions) and how constitutional 
and party structures may relate. Tripartite theory of parties: parties in the electorate, as organizations, and in 
government. Historical development of parties in the United States since the Founding. The impact of media, 
regional, racial, gender, ethnic, and class identities on American party development. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
317. Global Corruption. CCI, SS Inquiry into causes and political, social, and economic effects of corruption 
worldwide, with focus on developing countries. Analysis of prospects of success in anticorruption reform and 
prescriptions for hurrying it along. Examination of role of political institutions, social norms, multinational 
firms, international organizations, grassroots activists. Readings include legal research, case studies, statistical 
analyses, policy reports. Prior coursework in political science a prerequisite, basic understanding of multivariate 
statistics helpful but not required. Instructor: Manion. One course.
318. Congress and the President. SS, W Critical interpretations of public policies and institutional 
practices to better understand the United States system of divided government. Special attention to 
understanding the consequences of cooperative and adversarial goals of the executive branch and the Congress. 
Features of this institutional balance of power in policy-making; institutional and political origins of laws and 
regulations. Instructor: Staff. One course.
319S. US Comparative State Politics. CCI, SS Intensive comparative examination of government, political 
cultures, and politics in the American States, including institutions (governors, legislatures, courts), history of 
federalism, policies, practices, and diverse cultural factors such as class, race, ethnicity, gender, religion, urban-
rural-suburban residencies that affect state politics. DukeImmerse students only. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor; Haynie. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 319S, Human 
Rights
321. International Law and International Institutions. CCI, R, SS, W The relationship between 
international politics and international law; how international institutions operate and affect social practices, 
and how legalization of institutions changes the manner of interpretation of legal texts. The nature of legal and 
political discourse over issues subject to international law such as human rights; issues of compliance with rules, 
the connections between international relations and domestic law, and the overall effects of international law 
and institutions on world politics; cross-national differences in attitudes toward issues such as environmental 
regulation, trade liberalization, and military intervention on behalf of human rights. Prerequisite: Political 
Science 160 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 324, Markets 
and Management Studies
322. Introduction to Middle East Politics. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Introduction to political systems, processes, 
movements, and conflicts in the Middle East. Instructor: Maghraoui. One course. C-L: Islamic Studies
324S. Chinese Politics. CCI, SS Inquiry into politics and policy in contemporary China. Equal focus on 



Political Science (POLSCI) 641

political fundamentals and major new policy challenges. Political fundamentals include communist party, 
elite politics, policy process, political culture, legal reform, representation, interest groups, protests, political 
dissidence. Policy challenges include economic growth, socioeconomic inequality, political corruption, social 
media, human rights, population planning, environmental degradation, minority nationalities, China as global 
player. Course does not assume prior knowledge about China. Prior coursework in political science or policy 
helpful but not required. Instructor: Manion. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
326S. Reason and Passion in Politics. SS Explores the nature of mass politics in democracies through 
the distinction between reason and passion and the idea that a well-functioning democracy requires the 
triumph of cold deliberation over emotion and intuition. Discussion of classic texts on reason and passion from 
philosophy, politics, and psychology; dual-process models of political judgment and decision making; political 
belief updating and persistent disagreement over facts; moral psychology and political ideology; emotions and 
collective action. Instructor: Johnston. One course. C-L: Psychology 326S
327S. The Economic and Political Performance of Civilizations. CCI, CZ, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Economics 351S
329S. Politics in Violence. R, SS, W Exploration of the role of violence in politics. What is the role of 
violence in the formation and consolidation of states? What is the relationship between violence and political 
regimes? In-depth analysis of the varieties of political violence in contemporary world: terrorism, coups, riots, 
wars, protest violence, revolutions. Combination of theoretical analysis and empirical exploration of cases. 
Exploration of non-violent forms of resistance and protest. Reading responses and final research paper required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 329S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 329S, Human Rights
330. Quantitative Political Inquiry and Evaluation. QS, SS Theory and practice of causal inference in 
political science research and policy impact evaluation. Students master how to test hypotheses and evaluate the 
substantive impacts of policy treatments using regression, experimental and survey techniques. Also develop 
skills in software applications such as Stata and R. Assigned texts assist learning of both the quantitative 
methods and how they are applied in practice and assignments emphasize practical applications. Prerequisites: 
Statistics 101 or higher; first semester of calculus (Mathematics 21, 111L or 121). Not available if received credit 
for Political Science 130D in Spring 2013 (Malesky) or Fall 2013 (Beardsley). Instructor: Staff. One course.
331. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS Economic, political, and philosophical 
perspectives on distribution justice and the problems in each discipline raised by variations on the prisoner’s 
dilemma. Classic texts include Hobbes and Hume, Smith and Mill, Rawls and Nozick. Gateway course to the 
Politics, Philosophy, and Economics certificate program. Recommended prerequisite: Economics 101 and a 
course in ethics or political philosophy. Open only to first-year and sophomore students. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Economics 361, Philosophy 246, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 331, 
Information Science + Studies, Human Rights, Ethics Elective
331D. Prisoner’s Dilemma and Distributive Justice. EI, SS Same as Political Science 331 except 
instruction is provided in two lectures and one small discussion meeting each week. Instructor: Munger and 
Rosenberg. One course. C-L: Economics 361D, Philosophy 246D, Information Science + Studies, Ethics Elective
332. Games and Politics. QS, SS Applications of modern decision theory to the study of political science. 
Topics include: individual decision theory and rational choice; game theory and human interaction; and social 
choice theory and the mechanisms by which individual choices are aggregated into collective choices. Political 
institutions such as voting rules, legislatures, parties, and hierarchy, alternative voting methods and political 
institutions, and how societies solve some practical distributive problems. Although course has no mathematical 
prerequisites, students should be willing to consider abstract models and follow logically rigorous arguments. 
Not open to students who have taken Political Science 671S. Instructor: Niou. One course.
333S. Democracy and Social Choice. CCI, QS, SS Course introduces students to the study of social choice 
and democratic theory. Social choice theory studies the properties of political institutions by which individual 
preferences are aggregated into collective choices. It provides a useful and powerful analytical framework to 
understand the choice and consequence of political institutions in democratic political systems. Topics include 
voting methods and theories, electoral systems, theoretical properties of social choice functions, strategic voting, 
voter qualifications, politics of suffrage, secret vs. open ballot, voting restrictions, representative districting, 
voting fraud, voting technology, etc. Instructor: Niou. One course.



 Political Science (POLSCI)642

335S. Economic, Political, and Social Institutions. CCI, SS Surveys theories of institutions based 
on economic, political and social perspectives with three parts: (1) an examination of what institutions are, 
how they originate, how they change, and why they often don’t change; (2) consideration of the effects of 
different institutional arrangements on development, growth, and stability in nations; (3) normative theories 
of evaluation and comparison—are some institutions better than others, and how could we tell? Covers 
selections from Aristotle, Buchanan, Dewey, Durkheim, Marx, North, Ostrom, Weber, as well as other thinkers. 
Prerequisite: introductory course in political philosophy. Instructor: Munger. One course. C-L: Philosophy, 
Politics, and Economics
336S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 346S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 351S, History 396S, 
Public Policy 326S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 349S, Human Rights
337S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. 
C-L: see African & African American Studies 316S; also C-L: History 386S, Public Policy 327S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 316S, Human Rights
338. Political Economy of South East Asia. CCI, EI, SS Course studies the history, political institutions, 
and economic development of South East Asia. Topics include the history of the region including the pre-
colonial period, forms of colonialism, the impact of World War II, the struggles for independence, nationalism, 
and communism, and the impact of the Asian Financial Crisis; tools of political economy to place the countries 
in a broader comparative perspective; and issues of great powers in South East Asia and the growing influence of 
political Islam in the region. Instructor: Malesky. One course.
340D. The Modern Regulatory State. CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 365D; also C-L: Public 
Policy 219D, Environment 365D
341S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab. EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
301S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 317S, Public Policy 311S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 301S, Markets and Management Studies, Human Rights
342. Strategy and Politics. QS, SS Introduction to the application of rational choice analysis (or economic 
models) to the study of political phenomena. Topics include social choice theory, legislative voting, problems of 
cooperation and collective action, and public choice theory. Familiarity with algebra and geometric reasoning 
required. Instructor: Niou or Vanberg. One course.
343S. The US Border and its Borderlands. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 216S; 
also C-L: International Comparative Studies 359S, International Comparative Studies, Latin American Studies
346. Business, Politics, and Economic Growth. CCI, SS The historical origins of political institutions 
affecting economic growth across advanced capitalist countries in Europe, America, and East Asia: capital 
markets, labor relations, research and development policy, social policy; effect of globalization and technological 
change on these nationally diverse arrangements; global convergence of corporate governance, national 
divergence of labor relations, research and development policies, and social policies. Instructor: Kitschelt. One 
course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
347. Globalization and Domestic Politics. CCI, EI, R, SS Examines the economic and political 
consequences of integrating international markets for democracy. Will explore the political and ethical 
implications of various features of globalization including trade, outsourcing, mobile finance capital, reform 
of the welfare state, international and intra-national inequality, uneven economic development, regional 
integration, etc. Class will end with a consideration of political and policy challenges presented by globalizing 
markets. Instructor: Wibbels. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
348. Global Environmental Politics. SS One course. C-L: see Environment 348; also C-L: Public Policy 349
349. Political Economy of Latin America. CCI, SS Study of interaction between politics and economies in 
Latin America with central emphasis on political correlates of alternative strategies of economic development, 
the impact of global economic forces on domestic policy choice, and interrelationships among political 
institutions, electoral choice, public policy, and economic performance. Topics include financial meltdowns, 
market-oriented reform, democratic transitions, ethnic mobilization, and rise of leftist-populism in the 
region. Readings will combine discussion of specific countries with broader theoretical literature addressing 



Political Science (POLSCI) 643

major debates in study of political economy of development. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 354, Latin American Studies 349
350. International Political Economy. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 222; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 350, Markets and Management Studies
351. Economic History and Modernization of the Islamic Middle East. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. 
C-L: see Economics 306; also C-L: Islamic Studies
352S. U.S. Policy in the Middle East. CCI, EI, SS U.S. foreign policy: Middle East; Arab-Israeli-
Palestinian conflict; oil and security; cold war; military cooperation and intervention; aid and democracy 
promotion; Iran, the Arab Spring; realism vs. liberalism in US foreign policy. Instructor: Maghraoui. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 353S
353. Globalization of Democracy. CCI, SS The past three decades have witnessed an unprecedented 
upsurge in democratic forms of rule in Asia, Africa, Eastern Europe, Latin America, and Middle East. Course 
explores reasons for this global pattern of political change, analyzes the process of political transition in a 
variety of empirical settings, and provides comparative perspective on challenges facing political leaders in new 
democracies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 334
354. Politics in the Developing World. CCI, R, SS This course addresses the challenges developing 
countries typically face. What is developing world? What is development? What is democracy? How do 
democratic regimes emerge and endure and sometimes die? What about the relationship between development 
and democracy? What factors hinder or facilitate the democratization process? Areas of study include Mexico, 
Chile, Turkey, Iran, South Africa and Nigeria. Case studies help enormously to illustrate and understand the 
broader theoretical issues studied early in the semester. Instructor: Leventoglu. One course. C-L: Public Policy 
354, Islamic Studies, International Comparative Studies
355. Comparative Health Care Systems. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 335; also C-L: 
Sociology 271
357S. Refugee Policy and Practice (DukeImmerse). CCI, EI, QS, SS One course. C-L: see Study of 
Ethics 388S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 355S, Public Policy 382S
358. Globalization and Public Policy. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 212; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies, Islamic Studies
359S. Social Engineering and Social Movements in Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 375S; also C-L: History 333S, Public Policy 282S
361. Political and Criminal Armed Groups. CCI, SS Course introduces students to a research agenda on 
armed groups that operate in the context of intra-state armed conflict or organized crime. Primary focus lies 
on how political and criminal armed groups interact with state agents and with civilian populations; how they 
recruit and maintain control over their members; how and why their internal institutions and their strategies 
of violence vary; and what the consequences of these patterns are. Also explore the role of the state, particularly 
when it comes to the effects of wartime repression, mass incarceration, and the war on drugs. Instructor: 
Schubiger. One course.
362. International Security. EI, SS, STS The various causes, processes and impacts of international 
conflict in contemporary international affairs. Factors that contribute to conflict, including the impact of 
scientific and technological developments on war and the ethical arguments and beliefs associated with war 
making. Contemporary and future threats to international security. Instructor: Staff. One course.
363. International Human Rights in World Politics. EI, SS Investigate the question of how and to 
what extent the rise of international human rights norms and discourse have affected the theory and practice of 
state sovereignty. Examine if and how international human rights norms, such as political, social and economic 
rights entailed in the international bill of rights and the prohibitions on genocide and torture pose limits on 
governments’ freedom of action and decision-making, domestically and in their interactions with others. 
Analyze the effect that international human rights procedures, such as international criminal courts, regional 
human rights bodies and UN have on the nature and actions of sovereign states. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 363, Human Rights
364. Political Violence, Repression, and Organized Crime. CCI, SS This course introduces students 



 Political Science (POLSCI)644

to a research agenda on intra-state armed conflict, repression, and organized crime. The primary focus lies 
on how political and criminal armed groups interact with state agents and with civilian populations; how they 
recruit and maintain control over their members; how and why their internal institutions and their strategies 
of violence vary; and what the consequences of these patterns are. The course also explores the role of the state, 
particularly when it comes to the effects of wartime repression, mass incarceration, and the war on drugs. Not 
open to students who have taken Political Science 361. Instructor: Schubiger. One course.
365D. Foreign Policy of the United States. CCI, SS Internal and external sources of American Foreign 
Policy, including the role of ethnicity, nationality, and distinct world views of Americans and other peoples. 
The formulation and conduct of American foreign policy in different historical periods with an examination 
of foreign policy in the post-Cold War era and prospects for alternative futures. Instruction is provided in two 
lectures and one small discussion meeting each week. Instructor: Feaver. One course. C-L: Public Policy 376D
366. International Politics of East Asia. CCI, SS Course explores the economic, political, and security 
issues in East Asia. Examines respective theoretical and historical backgrounds of the countries in the region 
(Japan, North and South Koreas, Taiwan, China, Southeast Asia). Focuses on issues surrounding the region, 
including globalization, economic interdependence, nuclear proliferation, territorial disputes, and terrorism. 
Utilization of some international relation theory and methodological tools for more systematic analysis of these 
issues. Readings will be drawn from international relations theory, political science and history. Instructor: 
Niou. One course.
367S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding. 
CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Environment 216S; also C-L: Public Policy 279S, International 
Comparative Studies 229S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 229S, Islamic Studies, 
Marine Science and Conservation, Human Rights
371. Marxism and Society. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 380; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
203, Education 239, Sociology 339, International Comparative Studies, Marxism and Society
372S. Sex, Politics and Feminist Philosophy. CZ, EI Provides a philosophical framework to think 
about issues of sex, gender and their political implications. Comparison between different historical traditions 
and methods. Study of a variety of feminist approaches and their critiques. Study of related questions, such 
as pornography, prostitution and multiculturalism. Readings include Mill, Beauvoir, Butler, Foucault and 
contemporary analytical philosophy. Instructor: Rousseliere. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 322S
373. Law and Politics. SS Examination of the nature and functions of law and legal institutions through 
critical interpretation of legal texts and practices. Relationships among bench, bar, legislators, and 
administrators in the development of public as well as private law. Attention to judicial reasoning used in the 
resolution of cases and controversies involving the common law, statutes including selected aspects of civil 
procedure, and the American Constitution. Instructor: Staff. One course.
374S. Watchdog Reporting in Politics. EI, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
374S; also C-L: Public Policy 357S, Study of Ethics 374S
377AS. Classical and Contemporary Political Theory. EI, SS Two courses. C-L: see Philosophy 384AS
378. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see German 380; also C-L: Philosophy 286, 
Literature 280, Marxism and Society
378D. Marx, Nietzsche, Freud. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see German 380D; also C-L: Philosophy 
286D, Literature 280D
379S. Religion and Politics in Post-Revolutionary Iran. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 
377S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 288S, History 265S
381. Greek and Roman Law. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 308; also C-L: History 240
382. Violent Jihad in the Twentieth Century - A Global History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
359; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 359, Public Policy 359, International Comparative Studies 361
383. Gender and Political Theory. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
365; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 367



Political Science (POLSCI) 645

384. Inequality in Western Political Thought. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Study of egalitarian and inegalitarian 
theories in the history of Western Political Thought. Distinction between forms of inequality (political, 
economic, social, racial, gender, etc.). Analysis of what kind of equality should be achieved (resources, 
opportunities, rights, respect, etc.). Connection of equality with other political and moral issues (freedom, 
responsibility, class conflict, well-being, poverty, exclusion, solidarity, difference, etc.) Readings include 
Aristotle, Machiavelli, Locke, Rousseau, Smith, Wollstonecraft, Tocqueville, Marx, Veblen, Du Bois, Friedman, 
Rawls, and Piketty. Instructor: Rousseliere. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 384
388. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism 
and Media Studies 372; also C-L: Public Policy 372, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies, Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies
390-1. Special Topics in Political Theory. Topics in Political Theory. Topics vary from semester to 
semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-2. Special Topics in Political Institutions. Special topics in political institutions. Topics vary semester 
by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-3. Special Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. Special Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. 
Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-4. Special Topics in Political Behavior and Identities. Special topics in political behavior and 
identities. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-5. Special Topics in Political Methodology. Special topics in political methodology. Topics vary from 
semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-6. Special Topics in Political Economy. Special topics in political economy. Topics vary from 
semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in Political Theory. Special Topics in Political Theory. Same as Political Science 
390-1 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-2. Special Topics in Political Institutions. Special Topics in Political Institutions. Same as Political 
Science 390-2 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-3. Special Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. Special Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. 
Same as Political Science 390-3 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-4. Special Topics in Political Behavior and Identities. Special Topics in Political Behavior and 
Identities. Same as Political Science 390-4 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-5. Special Topics in Political Methodology. Special topics in political methodology. Same as 
Political Science 390-5 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-6. Special Topics in Political Economy. Special topics in political economy. Same as Political 
Science 390-6 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-1. Senior Independent Study in Political Theory. Individual non-research directed study in a field 
of special interest under faculty member supervision. Offered only in areas of study not otherwise provided 
in department course offerings and with the direct approval and sponsorship of a faculty member. Will not 
generally be offered unless student has first established an extensive record of work with the faculty member. 
Written permission of faculty member and detailed description of course of directed study required before 
contacting the Director of Undergraduate Studies for permission number. Fulfills a political theory course 
requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-2. Senior Independent Study in Political Institutions. Same as Political Science 391-1 except fulfills 
a political institutions course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-3. Senior Independent Study in Security, Peace and Conflict. Same as Political Science 391-1 
except fulfills a security, peace and conflict course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-4. Senior Independent Study in Political Behavior and Identities. Same as Political Science 391-1 
except fulfills a political behavior and identities course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Political Science (POLSCI)646

391-5. Senior Independent Study in Political Methodology. Same as Political Science 391-1 except 
fulfills a political methodology course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391-6. Senior Independent Study in Political Economy. Same as Political Science 391-1 except fulfills a 
political economy course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393-1. Sophomore/Junior Research Independent Study Political Theory. R Individual directed 
research under the supervision of a faculty member. Central goal is substantive research paper or report 
containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Offered only in areas of study 
not otherwise provided in department course offerings and with the direct approval and sponsorship of a 
faculty member. Will not generally be offered unless student has first established an extensive record of work 
with the faculty member. Written permission of faculty member and detailed description of course of directed 
study required before contacting the DUS for permission number. Fulfills a political theory course requirement. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
393-2. Sophomore/Junior Research Independent Study Political Institutions. R Same as Political 
Science 393-1 except fulfills a political institutions course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393-3. Sophomore/Junior Research Independent Study Security Peace and Conflict. R Same as 
Political Science 393-1 except fulfills a security, peace, and conflict course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393-4. Sophomore/Junior Research Independent Study Political Behavior and Identities. R Same 
as Political Science 393-1 except fulfills a political behavior and identities course requirement. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
393-5. Sophomore/Junior Research Independent Study Political Methodology. R Same as Political 
Science 393-1 except fulfills a political methodology course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393-6. Sophomore/Junior Research Independent Study Political Economy. R Same as Political 
Science 393-1 except fulfills a political economy course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic 
Engagement. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Education 401S; also C-L: Public Policy 401S, Study of Ethics 401S, 
Ethics Elective
402S. Origins of WWI and WWII in Europe. R, SS Seminar will examine major scholarly works from 
History and Political Science that address the same question, namely, how can we explain the origins of World 
War I and World War II in Europe? Consider how these two disciplines explain why the Cold War did not 
escalate to full-blown war. Will provide students with an opportunity to undertake a significant research project, 
with opportunities to use one or another of the two disciplines or to undertake some form of integration across 
the two fields. Instructor: Grieco. One course.
406S. South African Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 406S; also C-L: History 450S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 406S, Public 
Policy 406S, Cultural Anthropology 406S
415. U.S-Russia Relations: 1991-2016. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 415; also C-L: Public Policy 
352
427S. World in Your Hand. QS, R, SS Your chance to hold the (simulated) world in your hand. First half 
of class provides background and tools needed to create computational, simulation models of political, social, 
and economic phenomena. Second half provides practical experience with class-chosen group computational 
modeling project(s) that will be submitted for publication. No prior computer programming experience required 
or expected, and skills gained in class will translate beyond academia. Instructor: Siegel. One course.
428S. International Conflict Resolution. SS, W The origins of armed conflicts and the means to resolve 
them, with special attention to strategic interaction, international law and third-party conflict managers. 
Historical and contemporary case studies used to illustrate theories of the onset and termination of violence in 
both interstate and intrastate conflicts. Writing developed in a multi-part assessment of an ongoing conflict that 
include simulation of a peace process. Instructor: Beardsley. One course.
435S. Chinese Media and Popular Culture: Politics, Ideology, and Social Change. CCI, SS One 



Political Science (POLSCI) 647

course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 435S; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 435S, 
International Comparative Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
445S. Capstone Seminar: Russia-USSR-Russia: History of Communism. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see History 467S; also C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 420S
449. Politics, Philosophy, and Economics Capstone. R, SS Capstone course open only to students in 
the Politics, Philosophy, and Economics program. Integrates and synthesizes the analytical framework and 
factual studies provided in other PPE courses. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Economics 389, Philosophy 465
456S. Chinese Culture and Ideology in the 20th Century and Now. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 456S
468S. Wealth and Poverty of Nations: Prosperity and Distribution in the Long Run. SS Overview 
of the different explanations for the economic development of nations in the long run and the differential 
patterns of distribution within them. Approach is global (what explains the dynamics of global inequality, the 
contrast between the developed and the developing world), historical (long term structural constraints and early 
institutional choices and their legacies), and analytical (theoretical identification of the mechanisms driving the 
wealth and poverty of nations, and the methodological strategies to approach them empirically). Instructor: 
Beramendi. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
480S. Capstone Seminars in Classical Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see Classical 
Studies 480S; also C-L: History 480S
483. What Machiavelli Really Says. ALP, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see Italian 483; also C-L: History 
405, Literature 483, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 473
490S. Special Topics in Political Science. Special topics in political science. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-1. Senior Research Independent Study Political Theory. R Individual directed research under the 
supervision of a faculty member. The central goal is a substantive research paper or report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Offered only in areas of study not otherwise provided 
in department course offerings and with the direct approval and sponsorship of a faculty member. Will not 
generally be offered unless student has first established an extensive record of work with the faculty member. 
Written permission of faculty member and detailed description of research project required before contacting 
the DUS for permission number. Fulfills a political theory course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-2. Senior Research Independent Study Political Institutions. R Same as Political Science 493-1 
excepts fulfills a political institutions course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-3. Senior Research Independent Study in Security, Peace and Conflict. R Same as Political 
Science 493-1 excepts fulfills a security, peace, and conflict course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-4. Senior Research Independent Study in Political Behavior and Identities. R Same as Political 
Science 493-1 except fulfills a behavior and identities course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-5. Senior Research Independent Study in Political Methodology. R Same as Political Science 
493-1 except fulfills a political methodology course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-6. Senior Research Independent Study in Political Methodology. R Same as Political Science 
493-1 except fulfills a political economy course requirement. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494A. Politics and Policy Practicum for Duke in DC. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 493A
495S. Honors Seminar. R, SS, W Course is open to junior political science majors who intend to write 
an honors thesis during their senior year. Purpose of course is to develop a thesis project, and to prepare 
students to conduct independent research under the direction of a faculty advisor. Students will acquire skills 
required to formulate a research question, develop a research design, conduct literature reviews, and gather 
appropriate data. Major component of class will be to practice these skills through weekly written assignments, 
and completion of a research proposal for honors thesis project. Course will not fulfill capstone requirement for 
political science major. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Vanberg. One course.
497S. Capstone Seminar: Latin American Left Turns: A New Politics for the 21st Century?. CCI, 
CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see History 471S; also C-L: Latin American Studies 471S



 Political Science (POLSCI)648

497S-5. Senior Seminar in Political Methodology. SS Special topics in political methodology; open 
also, if places are available, to qualified juniors who have earned a 3.0 average and obtain the consent of the 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
497S-6. Senior Seminar in Political Economy. SS Special topics in political economy; open also, if 
places are available, to qualified juniors who have earned a 3.0 average and obtain the consent of the instructor. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
501S. Politics and Media in the United States. R, SS, STS, W The impact of the media of communication 
and new technologies on American political behavior, government, politics, issues and controversies. 
Development of critical interpretive skills and arguments as students write research papers assessing the 
media’s political influence and effects. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media 
502S. Understanding Ethical Crisis in Organizations. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
562S; also C-L: Sociology 542S, Public Policy 558S
503S. Crisis, Choice, and Change in Advanced Democratic States. CCI, SS Contributions of Marx, 
Weber, and Durkheim toward analysis of modern democracies. Examination of selected contemporary studies 
using these three perspectives to highlight processes of change and crisis. Unsettling effects of markets upon 
political systems, consequences of bureaucratic regulation, and transformation of sources of solidarity and 
integration in modern politics. Instructor: Kitschelt. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
504S. Comparative Ethnic Politics. CCI, CZ, SS Why and when ethnicity becomes a salient cleavage for 
political mobilization and the conditions under which ethnic collective action may take violent or non-violent 
forms. Approaches to the study of social identities; types of ethnic collective action, including non-violent 
(electoral participation and social protest) and violent ones (riots, rebellions, civil war, and terrorism); and main 
normative debates in favor and against ethno-cultural group rights. Comparisons include Latin America, Africa, 
Europe, and South Asia. Instructor: Staff. One course.
505S. Race in Comparative Perspective. CCI, SS Comparative study of the way race is socially 
constructed in the United States, several European, Latin American, and other countries. The real effects of 
this social construction on the social and political lives of communities of color in these countries. Instructor: 
McClain. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 505S
507S. Religion and Comparative Politics. CCI, SS The relationship between states, societies, and religious 
institutions in contemporary world politics. Theories that emphasize the explanatory role of religious ideas, 
religious market structures, and different socio-economic and political conditions. Major focus on Christianity 
(Catholicism, Protestantism and Evangelicalism) mostly in Latin America, Western and Central Europe, and the 
United States. Attention also to Islam and Hinduism in Africa, the Middle East, and India. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
508S. Public Opinion and Behavior. R, SS Several facets of the political behavior of mass actors in 
American politics. Likely topics include the factors that cause the type and amount of individual participation, 
mobilization by elites, ideology and information, partisanship, partisan stability and change, socialization, 
macro-level change, negative advertising, economic voting, issue evolution, and the effects of institutional 
changes (especially election rules) on voter turnout. Consent of Instructor required. Instructor: Aldrich or 
Hillygus. One course.
509S. Political Participation: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, SS The study of political participation 
through development of an understanding of relevant research methods. The effects of political culture on 
political participation. Popular participation and mobilization systems in liberal democracies and developing 
countries. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 511S
515S. Post War Europe, 1945-1968: Politics, Society, and Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see History 537S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 537S
516S. Rule of Law. EI, SS An investigation, employing both historical and conceptual analysis, of the idea of 
the rule of law. Several classic and contemporary texts will be considered. Topics include: the nature of law; the 
relationship between law and morality; the relationship between the rule of law and politics; the role, if any, of 
the rule of law in facilitating social and economic development; and the ways in which the rule of law might be 
institutionalized in modern society. Permission of instructor required. Instructor: Knight. One course.



Political Science (POLSCI) 649

517S. Democratic Institutions. CCI, R, SS How constitution makers choose basic rules of the democratic 
game, such as the relations between legislatures and executives, the role of parties, electoral system, prerogatives 
of constitutional courts, and other important elements of democratic institutional design; the impact of such 
arrangements on various groups within the state, and the overall performance of democracies; durability of 
arrangements, the structuring of power relations among parties, and whether democratic institutions affect 
economic and social policy outcomes. Instructor: Kitschelt. One course.
518. The Politics of Health Care. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 635
519. The American Party System. SS Role of political parties and the party system in the origin and 
perpetuation of democratic politics. Critical evaluation of different theories and models of the origins, 
structures, and activities of American political parties and their contribution to maintenance of a democratic 
society. Development of original research or critical evaluation of research findings using an extensive array of 
evidence, including statistical estimation and formal modeling. Instructor: Aldrich. One course.
520S. Congressional Policy-Making. SS Lawmaking and oversight of the executive branch by the U.S. 
Congress. Committee, party, executive, and interest group roles. Instructor: Rohde. One course.
521S. Gender, Identity, and Public Policy. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 530S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 515S
522S. Comparative Party Politics. CCI, R, SS The concepts, models, and theories employed in the study of 
political parties in various competitive democracies. Focus on advanced industrial democracies where there is a 
rich empirically oriented literature on this topic. The resurgence of democracy in developing areas and the role 
of party competition and democracies in these regions of the world. Instructor: Kitschelt. One course.
525S. Race and American Politics. CCI, SS A broad overview of the salience of race in the American 
political fabric and how it structures racial attitudes on a number of political and policy dimensions. Instructor: 
McClain. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 544S, Public Policy 526S
526S. Markets and Democracy in Latin America. CCI, R, SS Explores the interaction between markets 
and democracy in Latin America in relationship to broader theoretical and substantive debates in the field of 
comparative politics. Addresses competing theoretical perspectives on the interaction between markets and 
democratic institutions; focuses upon issues of regime change and consolidation with emphasis on the political 
economy of democratic transitions and institutional change; and examines the politics of market-oriented 
reform in the new international context of regional development with emphasis on policy formation in Latin 
America. Instructor: Staff. One course.
527S. Global Africa. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 561S; also C-L: African & 
African American Studies 510S, History 561S, International Comparative Studies 510S
528S. Peace and Conflict Processes. R, SS, W Understanding the causes of armed conflict, as well as 
strategies to prevent, manage and resolve it. Course readings from the academic literature. Writing developed in 
a multi-part assessment of an ongoing conflict that includes simulation of a peace process and a final research 
paper. Prerequisite: Political Science 160S. Instructor: Beardsley. One course.
536S. Choosing in Groups: Social Choice and Collective Action. QS, R Survey of problems of social 
choice and collective action in politics and economics. Representing preferences, indifference, geometric 
representation of trade-offs. Consideration of Arrow Problem and Olson Problem of Collective Action. Instructor 
consent required. Prerequisite: Political Science 342 or equivalent. Instructor: Munger. One course.
542S. The Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 556S; also C-L: History 556S
543. Counterterrorism Law and Policy. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 504
544. 9/11: Causes, Response & Strategy. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 561; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 561
545S. International Environmental Regimes. EI, SS, STS Law, politics, and institutional design of 
international regimes created among nations to cope with environmental problems. Includes study of particular 
conventions and treaties (for example, acid rain, ozone, carbon reduction, biodiversity, Antarctica, regional seas, 
ocean dumping), and the environmental implications of international trade rules and regimes (for example, 
GATT). Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 581S, International Comparative Studies 521S



 Political Science (POLSCI)650

546S. Assisting Development. R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 515S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 514S
547. Politics of United States Foreign Policy. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 506; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 506
549S. Collective Action, Property Rights, and the Environment. CCI, EI, SS The rational choice 
tradition (public goods, collective action, game theory, property rights, new institutionalism) as applied to 
environmental problems, resource exploitation, environmental justice, and the design of an environmentally 
sound society. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 544S, Energy and the Environment
550S. Predicting Politics: Counter Insurgency, Elections, and Stability. QS, R, SS Learn modes 
of predicting political events and outcomes. Survey of ways that are used to predict US National Presidential 
and Congressional elections, as well as polls. During election years, will focus on active campaigns. Second half 
of course devoted to prediction of conflict outbreaks around the world. Students will develop their own data, 
models, and forecasts for political processes. Pre-requisites: 300 level course in the subfield as well as all general 
requirements in the major: Political Science 102, 175, and Statistics 101. Instructor: Staff. One course.
551S. Voting Behavior. QS, R, SS A research-centered seminar focusing on models of voting behavior. 
Voting behavior includes individual voting by citizens in democracies but also voting by politicians in a variety of 
contexts (e.g., national legislatures or the United Nations). Methods employed will range from applied statistics 
to game theory to more recent innovations in the areas of computational social science and machine learning. 
Students will produce a journal length article. Instructor: Demarchi. One course.
555S. The Politics of Market Competition in a Global Economy. R, SS Course examines history and 
contemporary political, economic, and legal aspects of industrial policy and its development in East Asia. 
Explores evolution of economic competition or business-state relations thought and practice in East Asia over 
the past century, the recent rapid spread of innovative policies, as well as domestic and international conflicts 
and cooperation over competition policy. Students will write original research papers on a related topic of 
their own choosing. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 555S, Public Policy 555S, Markets and 
Management Studies
561S. Problems in International Security. R, SS States attempt to secure their population and territory. 
Such security measures sometimes bring states into conflict with each other. Course explores how states search 
for security, cooperate with one another, and engage in interstate violence. Instructor: Staff. One course.
562S. American Grand Strategy. CZ, R, SS, W Study of policy that nations adopt to marshal their 
political, economic, military, technological, and diplomatic resources to achieve their national goals in the 
international environment they face, drawing on political science, history, public policy, law and political 
economy and other disciplines to achieve these ends. Course examines the history, current reality, and future 
prospects of American grand strategy. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Feaver or Miles. One course. 
C-L: History 567S, Public Policy 501S
570. Frankfurt School Critical Theory. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see German 570; also C-L: Philosophy 572
573S. Intellectual History and Political Theory. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 541S
574S. Dissent, Disobedience and Revolution. R, SS Examines boundaries of democratic practice—
including hate speech, protest, and secession. Key topics in democratic theory will be addressed including 
scholarly debates over free speech, civil disobedience, and justified revolution. Readings include works by Mill, 
Locke, Waldron, Buchanan, Cristiano, Elster. Instructor: Kirshner. One course.
575S. Ancient Political Philosophy. CCI, EI, SS Intensive analysis of the political philosophy of Plato, 
Aristotle, and other ancient theorists. Research paper required. Instructor: Gillespie or staff. One course. C-L: 
Classical Studies 571S, Philosophy 571, Ethics Elective
576. Politics and Philosophy of Self and Other. EI, SS Epistemological, ontological, ethical, and political 
dimensions of relations between self and other. Theorists may include Husserl, Merleau-Ponty, Levinas, 
Derrida, Adorno, Gadamer, Sartre, Foucault, and Bakhtin. Instructor: Staff. One course.
577S. Nietzsche’s Political Philosophy. CZ, EI, SS Study of the thinker who has, in different incarnations, 
been characterized as the prophet of nihilism, the destroyer of values, the father of fascism, and the spiritual 
source of postmodernism. An examination of his philosophy as a whole in order to come to terms with its 



Political Science (POLSCI) 651

significance for his thinking about politics. Instructor: Gillespie. One course. C-L: German 576S, Philosophy 
537S
578S. Contemporary Theories of Democracy. EI, SS Seminar has three aims: (a) to introduce students to 
some important topics and approaches in contemporary democratic theory; (b) to investigate the ways in which 
these issues are related to broader discussions about the strengths and weaknesses of democracy and the rule 
of law; (c) to familiarize students with a range of strategies for justifying or criticizing political arrangements 
or policies. Topics include social justice, individual rights and community, representation, deliberation, the 
relationship between democratic decision-making and markets and the normative implications of moral, 
religious and ideological pluralism. Instructor: Knight. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 578S, Ethics Elective
579S. Topics in Early Modern Political Thought from Machiavelli to Mills. CCI, R, SS Topics vary 
from semester to semester. Topics course. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Philosophy 566S
580S. Social Theory and Social Practice. Comparison and critique of answers given by philosophers 
and social theorists to the questions: what can we know about society and what is the practical utility of that 
knowledge? Theorists and topics include Aristotle, early modernity’s “new science of politics,” Marxist praxis, 
Weber’s “wertfrei” science, Mill’s logic of the “moral sciences,” Comte’s sociology, Mannheim’s sociology of 
knowledge, behaviorism and its critics, and the vocation of social science. Instructor: Staff. One course.
581S. Heidegger. CZ, EI, SS An examination of the philosophy of Martin Heidegger from its 
phenomenological beginnings to its postmodernist conclusions with particular attention to its meaning 
for questions of identity, history, nihilism, technology, and politics. Instructor: Gillespie. One course. C-L: 
Philosophy 573S
582S. Contemporary Ethical Theories. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 503S; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
583S. Thucydides and the Realist Tradition. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Focus on Thucydides as a foundational text 
in the international relations tradition of realism. Issues include human nature; the relationship between self-
interest and moral norms; conceptions of power; and motivations of justice. Readings will include Thucydides’ 
History, selections from Hobbes’ Leviathan, evidence from the post-Napoleonic and post-World War I periods, 
and modern interpretive studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
584S. Modern Political Theory. CCI, EI, SS A historical survey and philosophical analysis of political 
theory from the beginning of the seventeenth to the middle of the nineteenth century. The rise of liberalism, the 
Age of Enlightenment, the romantic and conservative reaction, idealism, and utilitarianism. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Philosophy 584S, Ethics Elective
585S. Adversarial Ethics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 510S; also C-L: Study of Ethics 510S
586S. Political Thought in the United States. EI, SS American political thought and practice through the 
Civil War period. A critical analysis of the writing of our founders and their European antecedents. Focus on the 
philosophical and political debates and the underlying ethical and political issues found in the debates over the 
Constitution, slavery, and the Union. Instructor: Gillespie or staff. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
587S. Free Speech, Hate Speech, and Civil Disobedience. EI, SS What justifies free speech? When 
can it be limited legitimately? What justifies civil disobedience? Is violent resistance ever justified? Answering 
these questions will constitute the key work of this course. Students will debate these questions by confronting 
key works in political philosophy and by thinking through how these theoretical questions come up in debates 
over: the regulation of pornography and hate speech, the ridiculing of religious figures, and the use of violence 
to protest unjust policies. Readings include works: Mill, Locke, King, Langton, Waldron, Shelby and Rawls. 
Instructor: Kirshner. One course.
588S. Toleration, Freedom of Conscience, and Religious Liberty. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Classical Studies 564S; also C-L: Religion 564S, History 564S
589S. Moments in Black (Radical) Theory: From Ferguson to Rhodes Must Fall to Silent Sam. 
CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 503S; also C-L: Religion 503S, Cultural 
Anthropology 503S, International Comparative Studies 504S
590-1. Intermediate Topics in Political Theory. Intermediate topics in political theory. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.



 Political Science (POLSCI)652

590-2. Intermediate Topics in Political Institutions. Intermediate topics in political institutions. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-3. Intermediate Topics in Security, Peace, and Conflict. Intermediate topics in security, peace, and 
conflict. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-4. Intermediate Topics in Behavior and Identities. Intermediate topics in behavior and identities. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-5. Intermediate Topics in Political Methodology. Intermediate topics in political methodology. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-6. Intermediate Topics in Political Economy. Intermediate topics in political economy. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
590S-2. Intermediate Topics in Political Institutions. Intermediate topics in political institutions taught 
in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-3. Intermediate Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. Intermediate topics in security, peace, 
and conflict taught in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-4. Intermediate Topics in Behavior and Identities. Intermediate topics in behavior and identities 
taught in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-5. Intermediate Topics in Political Methodology. Intermediate topics in political methodology 
taught in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-6. Intermediate Topics in Political Economy. Intermediate topics in political economy taught in 
seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
610S. Political Persuasion. SS Course will examine political persuasion and democratic decision-making, 
with particular attention paid to US presidential campaigns. Explores what techniques political elites use to 
attempt to influence mass opinions and behaviors; who is likely to be influenced by such appeals; and the role 
of the mass media. Readings drawn from political communication, political psychology, and political behavior. 
Instructor: Hillygus. One course.
616S. Persistence and Change in Political Institutions. CCI, R, SS Persistence and Change in Political 
Institutions. International and domestic institutions in world politics; focus on causes and mechanisms of 
institutional persistence and change in comparative perspective. Examines, for instance, evolution of political-
economic institutions under the impact of globalization. Instructor: Staff. One course.
617S. The Regulatory Process. R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 609S
618S. Politics of Institutional Change. R, SS Research seminar focusing on the political economy of 
institutional change with emphasis on less industrialized and emerging market nations. Open to undergraduates 
with permission of the instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
619. Media and Social Change. CCI, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
676; also C-L: Public Policy 676, Russian 516, Information Science + Studies, Policy Journalism and Media, 
International Comparative Studies
630. Probability and Basic Regression. QS Offers an introduction to empirical methods used in 
contemporary research in political science. Course develops an applied understanding of the linear regression 
model in the context of political science research questions. Students will be able to evaluate and interpret allied 
aggression results as well as develop their own simple models. Required of all incoming graduate students. Open 
only to Political Science graduate students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
631L. Introduction to Deductive & Analytical Approaches to Political Phenomena. R, 
SS Introduction to deductive and analytical approaches currently used to study political phenomena, with 
focus on fundamentals of non-cooperative game theory. Students will become good consumers of applied game 
theoretic research as well as be able to develop some simple game theoretic models of political phenomena. 
Required of all incoming graduate students. Instructor: Leventoglu or Niou. One course.
632. Computational Political Economy. R, SS Introduction to the field of computational modeling. 
Emphasis on conducting formal replicable investigations of political phenomena with clearly defined 



Political Science (POLSCI) 653

assumptions and hypotheses. Study of current literature in cognitive psychology, political psychology, and 
experimental economics. Instructor: de Marchi. One course.
633S. Positive Political Theory. R, SS Introduction to generating hypotheses and building theory in 
political science. Focus on general principles of deductive and computational modeling, how theoretical models 
connect to empirical tests, and several of the main schools of theoretical modeling in political science including 
game theory and social choice. Course is expected to be taken simultaneously with Political Science 748. Open 
only to Political Science graduate students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
634. Social Networks and Political Interdependence. QS, R, SS Theory of and empirical support for 
importance of networks and interdependent behavior in political and social processes. Methodology covered 
includes tools for empirical analysis of relational data as well as game theoretic and computational/behavioral 
modeling approaches to analyzing role of network structure. Substantive ties to literatures in political science, 
economics, and sociology. Instructor: Siegel. One course.
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 645S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 642S, Economics 541S, Sociology 642S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 642S, Human Rights
644S. The Political Economy of Inequality. R, SS Study of the concept and measurement of inequality; 
evolution of inequality across concepts, space, time (developed and developing world); what explains this 
evolution; and political consequences of inequality. Instructor: Beramendi. One course.
645S. Political Economy of Growth, Stabilization and Distribution. R, SS Examines why some 
nations are rich and others poor; whether financial crises are inevitable; whether economic growth reduces 
poverty, increases inequality, or both. Addresses extent to which answers to these questions are under human 
control. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 548S
646S. The Politics of European Integration. CCI, R, SS Politics and institutions of the European Union 
(EU) and the historical process that led to it. Theoretical perspectives discussed include classics of integration 
theory (neofunctionalism, intergovernmentalism) but also theories of state formation, delegation, and 
distributional politics (EU comparatively as instance of common political phenomena). Social constructivist, 
gender, and Marxist theories also considered. Research papers on process of European integration or 
contemporary EU politics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
647S. International Democratization. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 513S
650S. Political Economy of International Relations. R, SS Provides an intensive investigation of the 
major political-economic actors and their interactions in the modern world economy: states, multinational 
enterprises, and international institutions. Serves as capstone experience for undergraduate students who 
are pursuing Political Economy or Security, Peace and Conflict as concentrations in political science, or 
who are pursuing a certificate in Markets and Management. Designed to help graduate students prepare for 
the qualifying exam in Security, Peace and Conflict and in Political Economy, and to provide them with an 
opportunity to conduct sustained research in these two fields. Instructor: Grieco. One course. C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
651S. Theories of International Political Economy. SS Advanced discussion of core issues and the 
research frontier in IPE (trade, finance, economic development, globalization). Focus on theoretical debates over 
the source of preferences, the role of power and institutions, conflict and cooperation in the world economy. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Public Policy 651S
652S. Repression and State Violence. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS This course engages with research on state-
sanctioned violence against individuals and groups. Topics covered include the relationship between repression, 
state violence, and political order; the perceived (il)legitimacy of different types of state violence; logics and 
effects of state-sanctioned violence against different segments of civilian populations in times of war and 
peace; patterns of human rights violations around the globe; repression in democratic and autocratic regimes; 
mass killings; disappearances; police violence; mass incarceration; the war on drugs; the implications of new 
information and communication technologies for repressive practices and surveillance. Instructor: Schubiger. 
One course.
658S. Political Economy of Terrorism. SS Seminar in the formal, quantitative study of subnational 



 Political Science (POLSCI)654

terrorism. Addresses historical terror examples, aggregate and individual determinants of terrorism, 
mobilization and terror networks, methods of terror and counter-terror and their consequences, organization 
of and competition between terror groups. Focuses on unsolved problems and opportunities for research. 
Instructor: Siegel. One course.
659S. Civil Wars. CCI, EI, R, SS In-depth examination of internal armed conflict. Exploration of micro and 
macro level approaches to causes of civil wars; types of civil wars; ethnicity and conflict; warfare; repertoires 
and dynamics of violence in conflict; armed group organizations and their tactics; relationship between armed 
groups and the state; duration and termination of internal conflicts; consequences of conflict and processes of 
transitional justice after conflict termination. Overview of both classical and more recent works on these topics. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
660S. Theories of International Conflict. R, SS Social science literature review of the causes of 
international conflict emphasizing the theories concerning the causes of war. Objectives of course: to identify the 
strengths and weaknesses of the literature concerning the causes of war; to define specific questions and issues 
which must be addressed by future research; and to develop concrete research strategies for investigating these 
questions. Instructor: Staff. One course.
661S. Courts, Wars, Legacies of Wars. R, SS The impact of international wars, international policing, and 
domestic wars relating to national security on the United States courts of the Fourth Circuit (Maryland, Virginia, 
West Virginia, North and South Carolina), and the role played by these courts in the Mid-Atlantic South from 
the American Founding into the Cold War Era. The American Constitution, laws, and treaties of the United 
States, and principles of admiralty and international law which figure in assigned published and unpublished 
judicial decisions of the region’s United States district and old circuit courts and of the post-1891 Fourth Circuit 
Court of Appeals. Research paper required. Also taught as Law 548S. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 
562S
662S. Problems in International Politics. CCI, R, SS The development and critical analysis of various 
models in political science and economics that focus on the relationship between international economics and 
international security. Various models of the impact of political-military dynamics on international economic 
relationships, and the impact of international economics on the likelihood of war and peace among nations. 
Attention to the interplay between economics and security in a key region of the world—East Asia. Prerequisite: 
one course in international relations, foreign policy, or diplomatic history. Instructor: Staff. One course.
663S. Energy and U.S. National Security. CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Public Policy 583S; also 
C-L: Environment 583S, Energy and the Environment
664S. Leaders, Nations, and War. CCI, R, SS, W The interaction between state structures and the 
international system, with a focus on the rise and development of European nations. Topics include war and 
its effects on national political institutions, nationalism, and state formation; war and national revolution; 
imperialism and decolonization; and economic dependency and national autonomy. Research paper required. 
Prerequisite: Political Science 160. Instructor: Grieco. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 664S
665S. Theory and Practice of National Security. R, SS, STS, W In-depth look at the theoretical and 
empirical literature explaining how states seek to guarantee their national security. Topics include: grand 
strategy, nuclear deterrence and warfighting, coercive diplomacy, military intervention, decisions for war, and 
civil-military relations. Special attention paid to U.S. national security during and after the Cold War. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Feaver. One course.
667S. American Civil-Military Relations. R, SS Theory and practice of relations between the military, 
society, and the state in the US. Special attention paid to how civil-military relations play out in the use of force. 
Other topics include: public opinion, casualty sensitivity, and the role of the military in partisan politics. Consent 
of instructor required. Instructor: Feaver. One course. C-L: Public Policy 667S
668S. Theory and Practice of International Security. R, SS Analysis and criticism of the recent 
theoretical, empirical, statistical, and case study literature on international security. This course highlights and 
examines potentially promising areas of current and future research. No prerequisite, but Political Science 160 
recommended. Instructor: Staff. One course.
670S. Contemporary United States Foreign Policy. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 502S
675S. Economy, Society, and Morality in Eighteenth-Century Thought. R, SS Explorations of 



Political Science (POLSCI) 655

eighteenth-century topics with a modern counterpart, chiefly (a) self-interest, liberal society, and economic 
incentive; and (b) the passions, sociality, civic virtue, common moral sensibilities, and the formation of taste 
and opinion. Original texts: for example, Bacon, Newton, Shaftesbury, Mandeville, Hutcheson, Hume, Smith, 
Hogarth, Burke, Cato’s Letters, Federalist Papers, Jane Austen. Stress on integrating economic and political 
science perspectives. Open only to seniors majoring in either political science or economics. Not open to 
students who have had Economics 312. Prerequisite: Economics 205D and Economics 210D. Instructor: De 
Marchi and staff. One course. C-L: Economics 547S
676S. Hegel’s Political Philosophy. EI, R, SS Within context of Hegel’s total philosophy, an examination 
of his understanding of phenomenology and the phenomenological basis of political institutions and his 
understanding of Greek and Christian political life. Selections from Phenomenology, Philosophy of History, 
and Philosophy of Right. Research paper required. Instructor: Gillespie. One course. C-L: Philosophy 536S, 
German 575S
677S. Contemporary Continental Political Thought. EI, R, SS Exploration and assessment of the 
major theories (critical theory, hermeneutics, post-structuralism) and thinkers (Adorno, Habermas, Gadamer, 
Foucault, Derrida) of European political thought from World War II to the present. Themes addressed include 
alienation, power, liberation, social construction of identity. Research paper required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
678S. Democracy and Constitutionalism. EI, R, SS Study of the essential questions of constitutional 
democracy and constitutional law: what makes democracy valuable and how constitutions work and are 
interpreted. Class will provide a strong foundation in both constitutional and political theory. Readings include 
works by Hamilton, Dahl, Ely, Dworkin, and Ackerman. Instructor: Kirshner. One course.
679S. The Past and Future of Capitalist Democracy I. EI, R, SS Intensive examination of theories of 
capitalism and democracy. Will study whether democracy and capitalism conflict; whether either is viable and 
self-correcting in the long term; competing theories of freedom, equality, and progress; relevance of ecological 
limits, sustainability, and resilience; alternative perspectives, including socialism and traditional conservatism. 
Attention to current debates, such as Piketty and inequality, climate change; major engagement with founding 
theorists of these issues, including Adam Smith, J.S. Mill, Marx, Schumpeter, with constant attention to 
contemporary relevance. Available for single semester but Intended as first half of yearlong course. Instructor: 
Purdy. One course.
680S. The Past and Future of Capitalist Democracy II. EI, R, SS Continuation of POLSCI 679S The 
Past and Future of Capitalist Democracy I. Intensive engagement with core texts and arguments concerning 
the relationship between markets and democracy, economics and politics: special attention to equality and 
inequality, ecological limits, and the challenges of the post-2008 crisis period. Readings include F. Hayek, K. 
Polanyi, J. Dewey, W. Lippmann, F. Hirsch, F. Fukuyama, T. Piketty. Instructor: Purdy. One course.
681S. Law and Philosophy. CZ, EI, SS Seminar will engage in an investigation of the concept of law. 
Employ both historical and conceptual analyses of several texts, both classic and contemporary. Topics include: 
the nature and legitimacy of law; the relationship between law and morality; the relationship between law and 
politics and the concept of the rule of law. Instructor: Knight. One course.
682S. Legal Analysis for Development Governance. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 
647S; also C-L: Human Rights
683S. Theology and Political Philosophy. CCI, EI Course will examine the transformation of theology 
and political philosophy in the period between Aquinas and Dante until Montaigne and Bacon. Understanding 
the changes in thinking about God, man, and the natural world during this period is essential to understanding 
modernity. While a knowledge of Christianity is essential in this enterprise, we obviously cannot cover all of the 
earlier Christian material in even the most rudimentary way in the course of the semester, we will look at some 
that is essential. Instructor: Gillespie. One course.
684S. Republicanism. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Study of the republican political theory and its historical tradition. 
Emphasis on key concepts of this tradition, including freedom as non-domination, virtue, the mixed constitution 
and the common good. Study and comparison of the Roman Republic, English, American, Italian and 
French republican trends. Readings include Cicero, Machiavelli, Milton, Montesquieu, Rousseau, Arendt and 
contemporary neo-republican scholarship. Instructor: Rousseliere. One course.



 Political Science (POLSCI)656

685S. Social Contract Theory. EI, SS Course investigates the use of social contract as a device to legitimize 
specific forms of social and political organization. Explores the origins of the social contract tradition, its most 
influential iterations in early modern philosophy and its revival in contemporary philosophy. Will study the 
role of social contract theory in the rise of liberalism, the question of the legitimacy of the state and the right to 
resistance. Course will also ask about the limits and exclusions intrinsic to the social contract as it has developed 
historically. Instructor: Rousseliere. One course.
686S. Injustice, Domination and Exploitation. CZ, EI, SS What is injustice? Why is it wrong if one 
group dominates another? How does exploitation work? Is imperialism wrong, necessarily? Recent years have 
witnessed a surge of theoretical and philosophical inquiry into the nature and forms of injustice including 
misogyny, racism and economic exploitation. Will read and discuss works by a diverse range of authors like 
Tommie Shelby, Kate Manne and Miranda Fricker. Will encounter classic works on the nature of justice by 
authors like John Rawls. Course has no prerequisites, but previous course work in political theory, philosophy 
and related subjects may be helpful. Instructor: Kirshner. One course.
690-1. Advanced Topics in Political Theory. Advanced topics in political theory. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
690-2. Advanced Topics in Political Institutions. Advanced topics in political institutions. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
690-3. Advanced Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. Advanced topics in security, peace and conflict. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-4. Advanced Topics in Political Behavior and Identities. Advanced topics in political behavior and 
identities. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-5. Advanced Topics in Political Methodology. Advanced topics in political methodology. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
690-6. Advanced Topics in Political Economy. Advanced topics in political economy. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
690S-1. Advanced Topics in Political Theory. Advanced topics in political theory. Same as Political 
Science 690-1 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-2. Advanced Topics in Political Institutions. Advanced topics in political institutions. Same as 
Political Science 690-2 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-3. Advanced Topics in Security, Peace and Conflict. Advanced topics in security, peace and 
conflict. Same as Political Science 690-3 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-4. Advanced Topics in Political Behavior and Identities. Advanced topics in political behavior 
and identities. Same as Political Science 690-4 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-5. Advanced Topics in Political Methodology. Advanced topics in political methodology. Same as 
Political Science 690-5 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
690S-6. Advanced Topics in Political Economy. Advanced topics in political economy. Same as Political 
Science 690-6 except in seminar format. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Political Internships
The department administers an internship program, primarily in Washington, DC, for political science 

majors and interested nonmajors. Students participate by qualifying for a position obtained by the department 
or by acquiring their own relevant employment, with or without compensation. Course credit can be obtained by 
enrolling in Political Science 292-1 or 292-2 and writing a substantive paper containing significant analysis and 
interpretation on a politics-related topic. Potential applicants should contact the internship director at any time, 
but preferably in the fall semester. 



Political Science (POLSCI) 657

The Major
Major Requirements. Ten courses for the major; this includes Statistical Science 101 and Political Science 

175/275 as the foundation requirements, three courses in one subfield concentration within the major, two courses 
in different subfields for breadth, and three (3) additional electives (at any level in any subfield). 

Statistical Science 101 will introduce social science research methods; Political Science 175 or Political 
Science 275 will introduce political philosophy. A more advanced statistics course may be substituted for Statistical 
Science 101 with approval of the director of undergraduate studies.

The three-course subfield concentration requirement and two courses for breadth are satisfied by selecting 
courses from the following subfields: political institutions; political economy; security, peace and conflict; political 
behavior and identity; political methodology; and political philosophy. An election must be made respecting 
courses bearing more than one field designation. Courses offered by visiting faculty, courses taken abroad, courses 
transferred from other universities, or special topics courses in which the content varies from year to year will be 
assigned subfields by the director of undergraduate studies. 

The three courses in the subfield concentration must include one introduction in that subfield at the 100 
level; one intermediate course at the 300 level; and one advanced course at the 400 or higher level.

Course levels are:
• Political Science 100-199: Introductory courses in subfields and foundation courses. Students must 

take any one (1) subfield introduction listed at the 100 level before taking 300 or higher listings. They 
may, however, take 200-level courses without any prerequisite. 

• Political Science 200-299: Nonintroductory courses with no prerequisite.
• Political Science 300-399: Intermediate courses that require any one subfield introduction course 

taken at the 100 level. 
• Political Science 400-499: Advanced undergraduate and capstone courses that require an intermediate 

subfield course taken at the 300 level in addition to meeting all of the general requirements of the 
major. 

• Political Science 500-699: Advanced undergraduate and introductory graduate courses.
New majors who wish to create an inter-field concentration made up of courses listed under different areas 

of concentration/fields or from different departments may do so in consultation with the director of undergraduate 
studies and their faculty advisor.

Of the ten required political science courses, at least eight must be Duke courses taught by a member of the 
Duke instructional staff. However, this requirement may be reduced to seven courses if the student: 1) is engaged 
in political science courses in a year-long study abroad through either a Duke-administered or Duke-approved 
program, or 2) transferred to Duke after completing two undergraduate years at another institution.

In satisfying the requirements of the major, students in the Robertson Scholars Program may count, 
exclusive of transfer courses, as many as two The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill courses offered at a 
level below the 400 level at Duke.

Advanced Placement Credit. Advanced placement credits in political science (score of 4 or 5). These 
course credits are designated as Political Science 90A (American Government and Politics) and Political Science 
90B (Comparative Government and Politics). Such credits are applied toward the 34.0 course credits needed 
for graduation. Advanced placement course credits (20, 21) do not satisfy course requirements for the political 
science major.

Suggested Work in Related Disciplines. Selected courses in such disciplines as anthropology, economics, 
history, philosophy, psychology, public policy, religion, sociology, and statistics are desirable. 

Interdepartmental Major. For information on declaring an interdepartmental major, consult the chapter 
“Degree Programs & Academic Credit” on page 22.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers students majoring in political science an opportunity to achieve Graduation with 

Distinction in political science by the submission of an original research paper.
To be eligible for honors, students must have:
• taken two courses in the subfield of your proposed research; 
• completed Statistical Science 101 or better (Statistical Science 210 or the equivalent is recommended), 

the political theory requirement (Political Science 175 or Political Science 275 in most cases), and a 
minimum of six courses in political science; 



 Political Science (POLSCI)658

• the statistics requirement may be waived if students are pursuing honors in the area of political theory; 
or

• have a minimum undergraduate GPA of 3.3, and a major GPA of 3.5; this GPA must be maintained 
until graduation. 

Other requirements may be waived in rare cases by the director of undergraduate studies.
The goal of honors in political science is an original research paper of journal length, which will be 

submitted to the Honors Thesis Committee by December 15 and April 1 of each year. Journal length papers are 
between twenty-five and thirty-five pages in most cases, and the key criterion is that the paper must feature 
original research.

The Honors Thesis Committee will, in most cases, either accept or reject the paper for honors and the 
paper will be read by a minimum of two members of the committee. Rarely, a revision may be requested by the 
committee (to be conducted by the student in the spring semester and due by April 1). If at all possible, students 
should start working on their honors research the spring of the junior year and over that summer.

Students may begin their honors research by producing a quality, journal-level paper in:
• a 400-, 500-, or 600-level political science seminar; or
• an independent study.
Often, the student will need to polish the paper during or after these options before submitting it to the 

Honors Thesis Committee.
In addition, the department staffs a yearly course covering research design for juniors who are interested in 

pursuing the honors option. The course will not be required for honors; however, it will be designed to facilitate 
independent student research and the pursuit of the honors option. Students in the course will be expected to 
produce a research proposal (and a specific one; for example, an empirical proposal would detail the data to be 
used down to the selection of variables and an outline of the model). If students are at all unsure about their 
capacity to do independent research, we encourage them to take the research design course. 

The Minor
Requirements. A minimum of five courses in political science, at least two of which are at the 300 or higher 

level. Four courses must be Duke courses taught by a member of the Duke political science instructional staff, 
but one course may be a transfer course. However, in satisfying the minor, students in the Robertson Scholars 
Program may count, exclusive of the transfer course, one course taken at The University of North Carolina at 
Chapel Hill. Courses taken Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory and Advanced Placement courses do not satisfy course 
requirements for the minor.

Portuguese
For courses in Portuguese, see Romance Studies on page 734.

Psychology
Professor Huettel, Chair; Professor Marsh, Associate Chair; Associate Professor of the Practice Hard, Director 
of Undergraduate Studies; Lecturer Vieth, Associate Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Asher, Ben-
nett, Bettman, Bilbo, Blumenthal, Brownell, Cabeza, Caspi, Chartrand, Costello, Dawson, De Bellis, Dodge, Egner, 
Fairbank, Gavan Fitzsimons, Grainne Fitzsimons, George, Groh, Hare, Hariri, Hoyle, Huettel, Kay, F. Keefe, R. 
Keefe, Kollins, LaBar, Larrick, Levin, Madden, Marsh, Moffitt, Nicolelis, Nowicki, Payne, Putallaz, Rubin, Sher-
wood, Siegler, Sinnott-Armstrong, Smith-Lovin, Strauman, Swartzwelder, Tomasello, Weinfurt,  C. Williams, 
R. Williams, Woldorff, and Yin; Associate Professors Adcock, Day, Egner, Gassman-Pines, Goldston, Linville, 
Rosenthal, G. Samanez-Larkin, Shah, Sommer, White, and Zucker; Assistant Professors Bergelson, De Brigard, 
Gaffrey, Gaither, McHenry, Overath, Puffer, and Seli; Research Professors Gold, Mazuka, Purves, Rabiner, Rez-
vani, Sikkema, and Suarez; Associate Research Professors Appelbaum, Ehrensaft, Meade, and Smoski; Assistant 
Research Professors Cogan, Pearson, and Svetlova; Professor of the Practice Bonner; Associate Professors of the 
Practice Compton, Hard, Schramm-Sapyta and Wilbourn; Assistant Professors of the Practice Mauro, Newpher, 
and Ng; Lecturers Murphy and Vieth; Instructors Bauer and Houde; Adjunct Instructor Blackshear; Lecturing 
Fellows Batson, Gerend, and Weitzel; Professors Emeriti Coie, Cooper, Costanzo, Curry, Eckerman, C. Erickson, 



Psychology (PSY) 659

R. Erickson, Hall, Hamilton, Leary, Lockhead, Palmer, Roth, Sheppard, Spenner, Staddon,  and Thompson; Asso-
ciate Professor Emeritus Angold; Assistant Professor of the Practice Emeritus Grimes; Lecturing Fellow Emeritus 
Serra

A major and a minor are available in this department.
There are five areas within the major: abnormal/health, biological, cognitive, developmental, and social. 

Most courses are classified into one or more of these areas. For a complete listing of courses by area, check the 
undergraduate section of the Psychology and Neuroscience website. 

Courses in Psychology (PSY)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
91. General Psychology. NS, SS Broad survey of modern psychology that emphasizes biological, 
evolutionary, cognitive, and developmental perspectives while placing this work in its historical, social and 
philosophical context. This course provides credit for introductory psychology courses that are offered during 
summer sessions or taken at other institutions that do not meet the departmental standards for the Introductory 
Psychology (Psychology 101) course that is required for all majors and minors. This course does not count 
toward the psychology major or minor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introductory Psychology. NS, SS, STS Broad survey of the field of modern psychology. The class 
includes a broad study of behavior with emphasis on biological, evolutionary, cognitive, and developmental 
perspectives while placing this work in its historical, social and philosophical context. Conceptual issues unifying 
the subfields of psychology are highlighted along with consideration of techniques and methods by which 
knowledge about the brain, mind, thought and behavior is acquired and refined. There is also discussion about 
the impacts on life and society of contemporary scientific approaches and technologies. Students are required to 
participate in psychological research. Instructor: Hard or staff. One course.
102. Cognitive Psychology: Introduction and Survey. NS, SS Overview of cognitive processes including 
pattern recognition, concept formation, attention, memory, imagery, mental representation, language, problem 
solving, and modes of thinking. The basic approach is both empirical (using data collection and analysis) and 
theoretical (building models using inductive/deductive reasoning). Application of basic laboratory results 
to cognition in everyday life. Students are required to participate in psychological research. Prerequisite: 
Psychology 101 strongly recommended. Instructors: Cabeza, Day, Marsh, Rubin, or staff. One course.
103. Developmental Psychology: Introduction and Survey. SS Overview of the cognitive, social, and 
emotional changes that occur throughout the lifespan, with emphasis on the period from infancy to adolescence. 
Examines both the empirical evidence (data collection and analysis) and the theoretical models (constructs 
using inductive-deductive reasoning) used in understanding human psychological development. Required 
participation in psychological research. Prerequisite: Psychology 101 strongly recommended. Instructor: 
Svetlova, Tomasello, Wilbourn, or staff. One course.
103D. Developmental Psychology: Introduction and Survey. SS Overview of the cognitive, social, and 
emotional changes that occur throughout the lifespan, with emphasis on the period from infancy to adolescence. 
Examines both the empirical evidence (data collection and analysis) and the theoretical models (constructs 
using inductive-deductive reasoning) used in understanding human psychological development. Required 
participation in psychological research. Prerequisite: Psychology 101 strongly recommended. Instructor: 
Svetlova, Tomasello, Wilbourn, or staff. One course.
104. Social Psychology. SS Effects of social interaction and social processes on a wide range of individual 
attitudes and behaviors (for example, conformity, leadership, prejudice, aggression, altruism). Emphasis 
on the logic, reasoning, research designs, and methods by which knowledge is generated. Equal attention to 
experimental and non-experimental research. Students are required to participate in psychological research. 
Prerequisite: Psychology 101 strongly recommended. Instructor: Gaither, Shah, or staff. One course.
105. Abnormal Psychology. SS This course provides a broad overview of abnormal psychology. Areas of 
focus include: Reviewing different theoretical perspectives for conceptualizing abnormal behavior; Approaches 
to the diagnosis and assessment of psychopathology; Major classes of psychopathology including how they are 
defined and treated; Current research in the field of abnormal psychology. There is a research participation 
requirement for this course. Instructor: Rosenthal, S. Samanez-Larkin, Zucker, or staff. One course.

https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/


 Psychology (PSY)660

106. Biological Bases of Behavior: Introduction and Survey. NS, STS An introduction to the methods, 
models, and reasoning that have led to discoveries about brain-behavior relations, and a critical evaluation of 
the current theories that guide our thinking about the neurobiology, development and evolution of sensory and 
cognitive processes, sleep, pain, emotion, hunger, and thirst as well as maternal and sexual behavior patterns. 
Recommended background: AP Biology or strong Biology background. Psychology 101 recommended for 
Psychology majors. Instructor: Murphy, C. Williams, or staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 101
107. Biological Bases of Behavior (Team-Based Learning). NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 102
113L. Computing and the Brain. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 103L; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 103L
141. Fundamentals of Decision Science. SS One course. C-L: see Duke Center for Interdisciplinary 
Decison Sciences 101
155FS. Vision. NS, W One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 155FS
185FS. Decoding Human Behavior. SS, STS What makes us who we are? Are we molded by our 
experiences, our genomes, or both? An investigation into the factors that contribute to shaping our behavior, 
drawing on evidence from diverse fields such as genetics, genomics, psychology and medicine. Explores recent 
scientific advances and examines how they further our understanding of normal and maladaptive behavior 
(their influence on health and wellbeing, and how this information might be used to shape lives at personal 
and societal levels). Course readings draw primarily from scientific literature, but will also include select book 
chapters and on-line resources. Open only to students in the FOCUS program. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Sugden. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Psychology. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus - Special Topics Seminars. Seminar for students in Focus Program only. Content varies by 
semester. Different courses (and areas of psychology) indicated by section number. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190SA. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Psychology. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
195FS. Intersections of the Sexual Brain. CCI, CZ, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 191FS; 
also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 191FS, Study of Sexualities 191FS
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 196FS; also C-L: African & African American Studies 196FS, Global Health 196FS, Public 
Policy 196FS, Sociology 196FS, Cultural Anthropology 196FS, Science & Society
201L. Introduction to Statistical Methods in Psychology. QS Introduction to statistical methods used 
in psychological research. Topics in applied statistical methods: measures of central tendency and variability; 
probability and distributions; confidence intervals and hypothesis testing; t-test and analysis of variance; 
correlation and regression; chi-square tests. Calculate and interpret statistics referencing data and research 
questions typical in psychological research. Includes a lab section with instruction in management and 
analysis of data using statistical software designed for use in social science research. Required for the major. 
Prerequisites: two Psychology or two Neuroscience courses (one of which may be taken concurrently with 
Psychology 201) or one Psychology and one Neuroscience course (one of which may be taken concurrently 
with Psychology 201). Restriction: Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 101, 102, 111, 250 or 
Mathematics 342. Instructor: G. Samanez-Larkin, Strauman, or staff. One course.
202. Research Methods in Psychological Science. R, SS, W Hands-on experience in designing and 
conducting research in psychology. Theoretical topics include experimental and non-experimental methods, 
including observational, archival, and case-study methods. Problems of validity and control. Using these 
theoretical tools, students review literature, design experiments, collect data, analyze data, and write papers 
on areas such as learning, cognitive science, sensation and perception, and social, clinical and developmental 
psychology. Instructor: Asher, Bauer, Vieth, or staff. One course.
202L. Research Methods in Psychological Science. R, SS, W Same as PSY 202 but with lab sections. 
Hands-on experience in designing and conducting research in psychology. Theoretical topics include 
experimental and non-experimental methods, including observational, archival, and case-study methods. 



Psychology (PSY) 661

Problems of validity and control. Using these theoretical tools, students review literature, design experiments, 
collect data, analyze data, and write papers on areas such as learning, cognitive science, sensation and 
perception, and social, clinical and developmental psychology. Instructor: Asher, Bauer, Vieth, or staff. One 
course.
203. Practicum. Introduction to the research of a faculty member, often preparing the student for 
independent study. Format varies, including readings, data collection and analysis, discussions, or other 
activities. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Does not count toward the major. Department consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
204L. Quantitative Research Methods and Statistics for Psychological Science 1. QS, R, SS First 
part of two-semester series (204L/205L). Design of research studies and use of statistical methods to become 
better consumers, creators, and communicators of psychological research. First semester (204L) focused 
on research design and measurement, ethical issues, statistical tests for observational studies (e.g., t-tests, 
correlation, non-parametric tests), statistical software, and communicating scientific findings. Students 
will develop the methodological and statistical knowledge and skills to conduct their own psychological 
research. Includes lab section. Required for psychology major. Recommended prerequisite: two Psychology or 
Neuroscience courses (one may be taken concurrently with Psychology 204L). Instructor: G. Samanez-Larkin, 
Strauman, Vieth, or staff. One course.
205L. Quantitative Research Methods and Statistics for Psychological Science 2. R, SS Second 
part of two-semester series (204L/205L). Design of research studies and use of statistical methods to become 
better consumers, creators, and communicators of psychological research. Second semester (205L) focused 
on experimental research design, ethical issues, statistical tests for experimental studies (e.g., regression, 
ANOVA, non-parametric tests), statistical software, and communicating scientific findings. By the end of this 
course series, students will have the methodological and statistical knowledge and skills to conduct their own 
psychological research. Includes lab section. Required for psychology major. Prerequisite: Psychology 204L 
(cannot be taken concurrently with Psychology 205L). Instructor: Samanez-Larkin, Strauman, or staff. One 
course.
206. Alcohol: Brain, Individual, and Society. NS, R, SS, STS Multidisciplinary course exploring the 
impact of alcohol use on individuals and society. Integrated segments focus on: biomedical effects; addiction 
and treatment; historical context of drinking; and college drinking issues. Instructor: Rezvani, Swartzwelder, or 
staff. One course.
207. Child Clinical Psychology. SS The etiology and developmental course of major childhood psychological 
disorders. Practices of assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of childhood psychological disorders and the 
research that supports these practices. Emphasis on understanding interactions among individual child, family, 
and social factors in the etiology, diagnosis, and treatment of childhood psychological disorders. Prerequisite: 
Psychology 103 or 105. Instructor: Gaffrey or staff. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
208. Behavioral Aspects of Health. SS, STS Overview of interdisciplinary field of behavioral medicine, 
emphasizing integration of social and behavioral sciences in the service of understanding physical health and 
illness. Psychosocial risk factors for medical illness; biobehavioral mechanisms whereby psychosocial risk 
factors affect pathophysiology; and biobehavioral intervention to treat and rehabilitate patients with major 
medical disorders in interdisciplinary settings. Instructor: R. Williams. One course.
209. Stress and Coping. SS Psychological theory and empirical work on stress and coping, with an emphasis 
on post-traumatic stress. Focus on the research designs, methods and reasoning by which stress is inferred and 
its effects assessed. Instructor: F. Keefe. One course.
210. The Psychology of Obesity. SS Course will examine the causes and consequences of obesity at multiple 
levels of analysis. Heavy emphasis on understanding the influence of social, psychosocial, behavioral, and 
social environmental determinants of obesity. Will also examine how these factors influence sociodemographic 
variation in obesity within and between populations. Also examines behavioral, clinical, community, and policy-
oriented solutions to the obesity pandemic. Instructor: Bennett or staff. One course.
211. The Psychology of Health Behavior Change. SS Major topics include the theory and practice of 
promoting healthful behavior change, use of mass, new, and social media strategies for health promotion, 
patient-provider communication, and the role of culture in health communication message design. Students 



 Psychology (PSY)662

should have basic understanding of social science research methods. Instructor: Bennett. One course. C-L: 
Global Health 261, International Comparative Studies 211
212. Introduction to Forensic Psychology. CCI, SS Examine the role of clinical psychology in forensic 
evaluations. Introduction: mental status evaluations and assessment for competency to stand trial. Explore 
impact of mental health disorders on forensics process. Read and discuss related texts regarding legal and social 
issues related to forensics. Psychology 105 suggested prior to taking this course. Instructor: Blackshear. One 
course.
213. Advanced Abnormal Psychology. NS, R, SS An advanced course in the lifespan study of adult 
psychopathology. Lecture and readings emphasize psychological and neuroscience perspectives on disorders 
such as as autism spectrum disorder, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, depression and schizophrenia. 
Readings are primarily journal articles and other original sources. Topics also include the logic of diagnostic 
systems, methodological and ethical issues in psychopathology research, integration across levels of analysis, 
and translating research findings into effective interventions. Prerequisite: Psychology 105. Instructor: Gaffrey. 
One course.
214. Exercise and Mental Health. NS One course. C-L: see Physical Education 207
215FS. The Psychology of Crime: Scientific and Public Perspectives. EI, SS Introduction to theories 
of criminal behavior from developmental and psychological perspectives, with focus on scientific and public 
perspectives. Investigate risk and protective factors influencing the development of delinquency and crime, 
systemic and sociocultural factors, ethical controversies, and applied topics in criminal behavior. Students 
critically evaluate, synthesize, and debate cases in context of current empirical research. Interactive learning 
emphasized. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Ehrensaft. One course.
220. The Psychology of Gender. CCI, SS The psychology of gender in this country, including sex 
differences, separation and individuation, and achievement; sexuality; sex-roles; mental health problems 
particularly salient to genders: cultural influences on gender development and views within the field of 
psychology of gender. Instructor: Kaivan, Vieth, or staff. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
221. Personality. SS Theory and research dealing with the human personality, focusing on universal features 
of personality that are part of human nature, ways in which personality variables and processes differ across 
people, and the processes through which personality relates to thought, emotion, and behavior. Topics include 
personality traits, genetic and biological influences on personality, cognitive aspects of personality, motivation 
and emotion, self and identity, unconscious processes, personality measurement, and personality dysfunctions. 
Students required to participate in psychological research. Instructor: Vieth or staff. One course.
222. Motivation Theories and Applications in Psychology. SS An overview of the concept of motivation 
and its use in psychological theory and research. This survey course will examine psychological theory and 
research on core human motives, such as needs for autonomy, competence, and belonging and the role they 
may play in determining self-regulation, behavior, and emotional experience. In doing so, this course will also 
consider how motivations are addressed both deliberately and automatically, through goal setting and goal 
pursuit and the implications for understanding situational influences, individual difference and psychological 
well-being. Instructor: Shah. One course.
223. The Self and Social Identities. CCI, SS, W Course broadly explores definitions of “the self” and how 
different social identities develop, change, and overlap with each other across the lifespan. Using both theory 
and a large body of empirical research from psychology, we investigate how our own sense of self as well as 
our perceptions of other people’s identities guide behavior. Using media examples, peer-reviewed research, 
and news articles we will examine both personal and societal views of identity that contribute toward the 
intersectional nature of social existence. Psychology 101 or at least one other psychology course suggested before 
taking this course. Instructor: Gaither. One course.
225. Political Psychology. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 240
226. Sex/Gender - Nature/Nurture: Intersections of Biology and Society. NS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 278; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 278, Neuroscience 278, Study 
of Sexualities 278
230. Relationships across the Lifespan. SS This course explores the developmental changes that occur 



Psychology (PSY) 663

in close relationships (e.g., parent, sibling, peer) across the lifespan, from infancy through late adulthood, and 
the differing roles these relationships play in the development and behavior of the individual. The impact of 
significant relationship events (e.g., divorce, marriage) on development will also be examined. Recommended 
prerequisite: Psychology 101, 102, or 104. Instructor: Putallaz. One course.
236. Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Human 
Development 260; also C-L: Sociology 260, Ethics Elective
239. Adolescence. SS Adolescent development, including identity formation, intelligence, sexuality, peer and 
parent relationships, vocational choices, drugs, and psychopathology. Theory and empirical findings. Emphasis 
on the methods and research designs that have led to an understanding of adolescent development. Required 
participation in service-learning. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
239-1. Adolescence. SS Adolescent development, including identity formation, intelligence, sexuality, peer 
and parent relationships, vocational choices, drugs, and psychopathology. Theory and empirical findings. 
Emphasis on the methods and research designs that have led to an understanding of adolescent development. 
Instructor: Bonner or staff. One course.
240. Educational Psychology. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Education 240; also C-L: Child Policy 
Research, Ethics Elective
240-1. Educational Psychology. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Education 240-1
240S. Educational Psychology. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Education 240S
242D. Discovering Education and Human Development I: How Social Scientists Learn from 
Data. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 298D; also C-L: Education 298D, Sociology 298D
250. Myths and Mysteries of Memory. SS, STS Understanding the feats and failures of memory in 
everyday situations. Exploration of the use and misuse of memory of interest across professions (e.g., medicine, 
law, advertising, education), via demonstrations, lecture, and readings. Topics include repression, how to 
study for exams, remembering names, early childhood memories, amnesia, photographic memory, eyewitness 
testimony, and pharmacological effects. Instructor: Marsh. One course.
252. Psychology of Thinking. SS, STS Overview of high level cognitive processes in both theoretical and 
applied areas. Emphasis on the research designs, methods, and reasoning for understanding how people engage 
in categorization, problem solving and decision making. The social implications of cognitive testing and an 
appreciation of the role of human factors in a technological age. Recommended prerequisite: one previous 
psychology course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
255. Human Cognitive Evolution. NS, SS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 260; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 260
256. Psychology of Language. R, SS Examination of linguistic structures and their psychological 
“reality,” language and cognition, biological bases, animal communication, language pathologies, nonverbal 
communication, and bilingualism. Everyday language phenomena (such as slips of the tongue) as well as 
experimental and theoretical research. Emphasis on research designs, methods and reasoning used to study the 
role of language in cognition and action. Research proposal required. Instructor: Day, Tomasello, or staff. One 
course. C-L: Linguistics 207
257. Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. NS The biological bases of higher brain function, including 
perception, attention, memory, language, emotion, executive functions and consciousness. Emphasis on human 
brain function at the macroscopic network-level, and the current theories and controversies in this rapidly 
growing field. Course is not recommended for first years. Prerequisite (one of the following): Neuroscience 
101 or 102/Psychology 106 or 107, or Psychology 102, or Psychology 275/Neuroscience 201/Biology 224, or 
Neurobiology 195FS/Neuroscience 195FS, or Neurobiology 193FS/Psychology 193FS/Neuroscience 193FS, or 
permission of instructor. Instructor: Egner, LaBar, or Overath. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 212
257D. Introduction to Cognitive Neuroscience. NS The biological bases of higher brain function, 
including perception, attention, memory, language, emotion, executive functions and consciousness. Emphasis 
on human brain function at the macroscopic network-level, and the current theories and controversies in this 
rapidly growing field. Course is not recommended for freshmen. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 
or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107 or Psychology 102 or Neuroscience 201/Psychology 275/Biology 224 or 



 Psychology (PSY)664

Neurobiology 195FS/Neuroscience 195FS. Instructor: Egner, LaBar, or Overath. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 
212D
258. Decision Neuroscience. NS, SS, STS How new research in neuroscience, cognitive psychology, and 
behavioral economics shapes our understanding of decision making. Topics include functional organization 
of key brain systems, approaches to measuring and interpreting neuroscience data, methods for measuring 
decision-making behavior, economic and cognitive modeling, and impact of neuroscience on real-world 
decision-making. Emerging topics will include applications in policy, marketing, and finance. Prior coursework 
in neuroscience or decision sciences is strongly recommended. Instructor: Huettel. One course. C-L: 
Neuroscience 258
273. Behavior and Neurochemistry. NS The role of brain chemicals (neurotransmitters, peptides, 
and hormones) in behavior. Hypotheses addressing the neurobiology of mental disorders and how they 
can be treated by pharmacological intervention. Emphasis on the development and critical evaluation of 
pharmacological models of brain function using mathematical and/or deductive/inductive models of reasoning 
and experimentation. Recommended prerequisite: Psychology 106 or 107/Neuroscience 101 or 102. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 363
274. Drugs, Brain, and Behavior. NS One course. C-L: see Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 360; also 
C-L: Neuroscience 360
275. Fundamentals of Neuroscience. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 201; also C-L: Biology 
224
276. Brain and Behavior: Translating Neuroscience. NS This course will focus on how brain 
mechanisms enable behavior. We will examine the neural basis of homeostatic control, voluntary actions, 
motivation, emotion, and decision making. We will use systems analysis to elucidate how volition, intentionality, 
and purpose can be emergent properties of neuronal interactions. We will also explore how different 
neurological and psychiatric disorders can result from specific defects in hierarchical neural networks. 
Prerequisite (one of the following): Psychology 106/Neuroscience 101, Psychology 107/Neuroscience 102, 
Psychology 275/Neuroscience 201, or Psychology 193FS/Neurobiology 193FS/Neuroscience 193FS. Instructor: 
Yin. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 211
277. Looking Inside the Disordered Brain. NS What brain circuits give rise to the dazzling diversity 
of human behavior, and how do even subtle disturbances within these circuits lead to abnormal behavior or 
psychopathology? This course provides students with a working knowledge of the brain circuits that create 
order in our social, emotional and cognitive worlds, and how disorder within these circuits leads to a broad 
range of psychopathology including depression, anxiety, phobias, PTSD, OCD, addiction, autism, schizophrenia, 
psychopathy and violence. Prerequisite: Psychology 106/Neuroscience 101 or Psychology 107/Neuroscience 102. 
Instructor: Hariri. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 277
278. Neuroethics. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 267; also C-L: Philosophy 353, Study 
of Ethics 269
279. Behavioral Neuroimmunology: Brain and Behavior in Health and Disease. NS An exploration 
of the interactions among the nervous, immune, and endocrine systems, and their consequences for neural 
function and behavior, using examples from both the human and animal literatures. Topics include the role 
of the immune system in cognition and emotions, neuroendocrine-immune interactions during stress, and 
the effects of stress on health and disease. The potential role of infections in the etiology of psychopathology 
(autism, schizophrenia) and neurodegenerative conditions (Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s) will also be discussed. 
Recommended prerequisite: one of the following: Psychology 106/Neuroscience 101, Psychology 275/Biology 
224/Neuroscience 201, Biology 101L, or equivalent. Instructor: Bilbo. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 373
280S. Social and Affective Neuroscience. CCI, NS, SS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 352S
282. Neuroscience of Movement and Athletic Performance. NS Addresses neurobiology of movement, 
sports and other forms of physical performance at a variety of levels, from biochemical and physiological to 
cognitive and behavioral. Starting with neurophysiology of muscle development and movement and progressing 
through use of imagery and cognitive training, we will discuss the variety of neurobiological processes involved 
in athletic performance, as well as methods used to study these processes. Explores neuromuscular diseases, 
injuries and dysfunctions as well as use of exercise and movement as therapy for neuromuscular and non-



Psychology (PSY) 665

neuromuscular disorders. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107. 
Instructor: Murphy. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 282
288S. Music as Biology. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 288S; also C-L: Music 288S
290. Special Topics in Psychology - Lecture. Topics vary by semester and section from the areas of 
Psychology: Abnormal/Health, Biological, Cognitive, Developmental or Social. Consent of instructor and/or 
specific prerequisites may be required for specific offerings. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Psychology. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Psychology - Seminar. Topics vary by semester and section from the different 
areas of Psychology: Biological, Cognitive, Developmental or Personality/Social. This course counts toward the 
electives requirement, but it does not fulfill the Seminar requirement for the major. Consent of instructor and/or 
specific prerequisites may be required for specific offerings. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302L. Brain Waves and Cognition. NS, R, W Combined lecture/lab course on the event-related potential 
(ERP) method and its use in cognitive neuroscience. ERPs, which are electrical brain waves triggered by sensory 
and cognitive events, provide a powerful means to noninvasively study the timing and sequence of the neural 
activity underlying cognitive processes in humans. The course covers how ERPs are generated, recorded, and 
analyzed, and how they are used to study cognitive processes. Students gain substantial hands-on experience 
in the context of performing a group cognitive neuroscience experiment. Recommended: previous courses in 
neuroscience/psychology, proficiency with computers, sophomore or higher status. Instructor: Woldorff. One 
course. C-L: Neuroscience 383L
303L. Functional Neuroimaging. NS, R Overview of use of functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI) 
in the investigation of human sensory, motor, and cognitive function. Topics will include FMRI to study human 
brain systems involved with movement, sensation, perception, and memory. Students will design and execute a 
neuroimaging experiment. Prior course in Statistics is strongly recommended. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Harshbarger and Overath. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 382L
304. Child Observation. R, SS, W Introduction of research methods used to study children (observational 
techniques, experimental design). Focus on developing proficiency in research methodology, communicating 
research findings to other psychologists, and increasing knowledge and expertise with young children. Prior 
courses in Developmental Psychology and Statistics strongly recommended. Open to junior and senior students 
only. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Svetlova. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
305. Research Methods in Social Psychology. R, SS, W Study of empirical research methods used to 
study contemporary issues in social psychology, including both experimental and non-experimental strategies. 
Prerequisite: Psychology 104. Prior course in statistics is strongly recommended. Instructor: Vieth or staff. One 
course.
306. Research Methods in Clinical Psychology. R, SS, W Contemporary approaches to treatment-based 
research in health and mental health. Topics include measurement techniques, randomized clinical trials, survey 
research, data analysis, and ethical issues. Laboratory reports emphasize proper interpretation and presentation 
of research findings. Instructor: Compton or staff. One course.
308L. Perception and the Brain. NS, R, W Explores capacities and limitations of human sensory systems. 
How the sense organs detect objects and events and what brains then do with that information. Concentrates 
primarily on the visual system, with some forays into other sensory modalities. Prerequisites: Psychology 102 
or 106/107/Neuroscience 101/102. Prior course in statistics is strongly recommended. Instructor: Groh. One 
course. C-L: Neuroscience 378L
309. Research Methods in Global Health. R, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 371
310. Research Methods in Psychopathology and Psychotherapy. R, SS, W Classic and contemporary 
research methods for the diagnosis and investigation of psychopathology as well as for conducting 
psychotherapy outcome and process research. Focus on developing proficiency in research methodology, 
developing skill in interpreting research reports and communicating research findings to other behavioral 
scientists, and increasing knowledge in the content domains of psychopathology and psychosocial intervention. 
Prerequisites: Junior or senior status and consent of instructor. Psychology 105 and prior course in statistics are 



 Psychology (PSY)666

strongly recommended. Instructor: Vieth or staff. One course. C-L: Global Health
313. Contemporary Neuroscience Methods. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 376
316S. Clinical Issues for the LGBTQ Community. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 235S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 235S
317S. Coping with Catastrophic Events. R, SS, W Impact, recovery process, and treatment techniques 
including psychological interventions focused on individuals, groups, and community. Instructor: F. Keefe. One 
course.
318S. Psychology of Positive Emotion and Experience. CCI, R, SS Critical examination of the positive 
psychology movement, including prior contributions to the field. Measures quality of data; issues related 
to gender, ethnicity, and culture. Focus on application to health. Prerequisite: One prior psychology class. 
Instructor: Bauer or staff. One course.
319S. Virtual Avatars of Peer Health Coaching. This is a training course for students who are interested 
in becoming peer mental health coaches for other Duke students. As part of a Bass Connections team, we are 
developing a peer to peer app that uses anonymous avatars to facilitate communication from students needing 
help to students trained to help them. This is an intense course in which students will learn how to help an 
individual manage intense emotions and hopelessness in moments of need. Topics include helping a suicidal 
individual, helping an individual deal with the aftermath of a sexual assault, and related topics. An initial 
interview and subsequent permission from the instructor is required. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Zucker. One course.
321S. Personality and Individual Differences. SS, STS Study of assessment of personality and cognitive-
ability traits, and their influence on the life course. Topics include: assessment of personality traits; behavioral 
genetics; personality continuity and change across the life course; influence of personality traits and intelligence 
on health and status attainment. Prerequisite: introductory course work in psychological methods and statistics 
in the behavioral sciences. Instructor: Caspi. One course.
322S. Freud and Sexuality. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 372S; 
also C-L: Literature 260S, Study of Sexualities 310S
323. Fundamentals of Global Mental Health. R, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 363; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 323
324S. Motivation Science in Social Psychology. SS Survey of motivational approaches in social 
psychology. Examines work on specific types of motivation (e.g., achievement, altruism, power) and the manner 
in which each may come to influence our actions, cognition and emotions. Also focuses on broader implications 
of motivational approaches for improving psychological health and well-being and for resolving interpersonal 
and social conflict. Instructor: Shah. One course.
325. Social Development from Childhood to Early Adulthood. CCI, R, SS, W Examines children’s 
social development from birth to early adulthood. Attention is given to the influences of family, peers, schools, 
and media on social development, including parent-child attachment, achievement motivation, self-concept, 
sex-role development, social competence, aggression, and moral development. Throughout the course, attention 
is also given to major theoretical perspectives, research methodology, the applied and policy implications of 
research, and to children and families from diverse cultural backgrounds. Prerequisites: Psychology 103 or 
Psychology 104 or Psychology 221, or instructor permission. Instructor: Asher. One course. C-L: Child Policy 
Research
326S. Reason and Passion in Politics. SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 326S
330S. Develop Your Life: A Human Development and Human-Centered Design Approach. CCI, 
SS This course combines developmental psychology, human development, and human-centered design with 
a focus on the developing student. Students examine their past development, understand themselves in the 
present, and consider a plan for future career and life, leveraging their past and present. Students learn others 
are both like themselves and very different. Varied life experiences, family background, cultural influences, 
education -- all make us unique. Beyond theoretical and substantive knowledge, this course helps students to 
understand influences and consequences of diversity, gain empathy and appreciation for others, and maximize 
their own journey. Instructor: Maxson. One course.



Psychology (PSY) 667

334. Cognitive Development. NS, SS, STS Ever wonder how you came to learn and think? This course 
looks at the start of these cool human abilities, covering how children learn to perceive, act, talk, understand, 
and reason with and about the people, concepts, and categories around them. Students will actively engage in 
mostly primary source readings, scaffolded by lively lecture. Students will leave with the theories, methods, 
and key findings of cognitive development in their back pocket, ready to interpret primary and media coverage 
of cognitive development. This is a tech-free course (no laptops/tablets/phones once lecture starts; possible 
exceptions discussed in class). Recommended prerequisite: Psychology 101 or AP Psychology strongly suggested. 
Instructor: Bergelson. One course.
335S. Moral Development. CCI, EI, SS How do children learn to tell right from wrong? How are they 
socialized into ethical practices of their culture? This course explores the sources of human morality by 
surveying major theories of moral development and analyzing the latest research on the emergence of the moral 
sense. It investigates the development of early prosocial behavior, socio-moral emotions (empathy, guilt, pride), 
cooperation, altruism, concepts of justice, moral identity, moral evaluation, and related phenomena. In addition 
to age-related changes, special attention is paid to cross-cultural comparisons. Prerequisite: Psychology 103 or 
Psychology 235 or Psychology 325 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Svetlova. One course.
337S. Social Processes among Peers. R, SS Peers play an intense and important context for development 
from childhood through adolescence. This course will examine some of the most central social processes (both 
positive and negative) that occur among peers (e.g., aggression, victimization, rejection, group acceptance, 
leadership, prosocial behavior), how these processes influence the development of the individual child and 
adolescent, as well as their predictors and associated outcomes. Gender and ethnicity differences will also be 
considered. Recommended prerequisite: Psychology 103 or 104. Instructor: Putallaz. One course.
339S. Life Span Analysis of Social Relationships. R, SS The emergence of different types of relationships 
at different ages (for example, friendship, marital relationship, parenthood) and the developmental changes that 
occur in social relationships across the life span; the differing roles these relationships play in the development 
of the individual. The beneficial and harmful effects of social relationships at different stages in life. Prerequisite: 
Psychology 101 or 103 or 104 or 221. Instructor: Putallaz. One course.
340S. Educational Neuroscience. SS Introduction to an emerging field of educational neuroscience. 
Discussion on how understanding brain development and cognitive development can benefit practices in 
education. Readings are primary journal articles drawn from fields of cognitive neuroscience and education. 
Prior coursework in developmental psychology, education, or neuroscience recommended. Prerequisite: 
Psychology 102 or Psychology 106/Neuroscience 101 or Psychology 107/Neuroscience 102. Instructor: Ng or 
staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 340S, Human Development
351S. Neuroplasticity and Expertise. NS, W One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 351S
353S. Neuroplasticity and Disease: Molecules, Cells, and Circuits. NS, W One course. C-L: see 
Neuroscience 353S
355S. Visual Perception and the Brain. NS, W One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 355S; also C-L: 
Philosophy 355S
368. Behavioral Finance: A Taxonomy of Money Mistakes. SS One course. C-L: see Economics 368
368A. Behavioral Finance: A Taxonomy of Money Mistakes. SS One course. C-L: see Economics 368A
371S. Cognition in the Classroom: Applying the Science of Learning to Education. NS, R, SS An 
overview of the science of learning and memory, emphasizing applications to education. Cognitive psychology 
as related to topics such as study strategies, discovery learning, long-term maintenance of knowledge, 
metacognition, concept learning, individual differences across learners, and the skill of teaching. Prerequisite: 
prior course in cognitive psychology. Instructor: Marsh or staff. One course. C-L: Education 371S
375L. Functional Anatomy of the Human Brain. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 380L
376S. Behavioral Neuroendocrinology. NS, W The neurobiological mechanisms of hormone-brain-
behavior interaction through an examination of empirical research and textbook readings. Topics include 
neuroendocrine systems, hormone cell signaling and physiology, neurodevelopment and sexual differentiation, 
sex differences in social behaviors across species (parenting and mating), stress response systems, hormone-
related mood disorders; with consideration of ethical issues. Research paper required. Strong emphasis 



 Psychology (PSY)668

on neurobiology. Prerequisite: Psychology 106/Neuroscience 101 or Psychology 107/Neuroscience 102. 
Recommended prerequisite: background knowledge gained from additional courses in neuroscience, 
psychology, biology, or evolutionary anthropology. Instructor: McHenry. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 366S
379L. Comparative Neuroanatomy. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 379L
390S. Special Topics in Psychology. Topics vary by semester and section from the different areas of 
Psychology: Biological, Cognitive, Developmental or Personality/Social. Consent of instructor and/or specific 
prerequisites may be required for specific offerings. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SA. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Psychology. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study on a previously approved topic under 
the supervision of a faculty member and resulting in a significant product that promotes understanding or 
application of psychological science. Junior year fall. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
392. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study on a previously approved topic under 
the supervision of a faculty member and resulting in a significant product that promotes understanding or 
application of psychological science. Junior year spring. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Meets general requirement of a curriculum Research 
(R) course but does not fulfill major requirement for an advanced seminar or methods course. Junior year fall. 
Prerequisite: Two courses in Psychology. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Psychology 393. Junior year spring. Prerequisite: Two 
psychology courses. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
405S. Great Ideas in Psychology. R, SS Ideas in psychology drawn from many content areas (including 
perception, personality, motivation, biological, social, cognitive, developmental) and approaches (including 
laboratory experiments, questionnaires, observation, imaging, interview, computer simulation). We will 
examine what makes ideas good, great, and mediocre, and also examine “bad ideas” in psychology. Course 
functions as a capstone experience -- an opportunity to synthesize previous knowledge, fill in missing areas, 
and reflect on the nature of ideas in the field. Implications for evaluating ideas in any academic discipline. 
Instructor: Day. One course.
410S. Community Based Prevention Intervention Research. R, SS, W Theories, methods and 
evaluation of health promotion and disease prevention interventions. Emphasis on prevention intervention 
research and community based research methodology. Areas of focus: establish community partnerships, use of 
formative research in development of community interventions, prevention interventions, practical procedures 
for implementation, dissemination of findings, opportunities for translational research. Topics include HIV/
AIDS, cancer, cardiovascular disease, reproductive health, psychiatric/mental health with domestic and 
international relevance. Combines didactic presentations, discussion, research critiques and development of 
research proposal. Instructor: Staff. One course.
411S. Disorders of Anxiety. SS Provides students with a solid foundation in the DSM anxiety (and anxiety-
related) disorders, focusing on presentation and correlates, as well as etiological formulations and treatments 
associated with multiple theoretical perspectives. Readings include journal articles, case studies, and empirically 
supported treatment guides; class activities include role-plays and treatment demonstrations. Open to juniors 
and seniors only, with priority given to psychology majors. Prerequisite: Psychology 105 and consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Vieth. One course.
425. The Psychology of Consumers. EI, SS The psychology of consumers and ways of influencing 
consumer behavior. How knowledge of consumer psychology and behavior is used to develop marketing 
techniques. How to use consumer psychology in making business decisions; the ethical issues associated with 



Psychology (PSY) 669

consumer influence. Prerequisite: Prior course in Psychology. Instructor: Bauer, Vieth, or staff. One course. C-L: 
Markets and Management Studies
426. Social Psychology of Business. CCI, SS Application of social psychological principles to the 
understanding of how businesses respond to significant environmental change. Focus on multinational firms 
to allow for consideration of cross-cultural influences. Recommended prerequisite: Psychology 104/Sociology 
104 or a Markets and Management course. Instructor: Houde, Weitzel, or staff. One course. C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
435S. The Role of Race and Culture on Development. CCI, EI, SS Critical examination of racial, 
cultural, and social influences on development of African American children in the U.S. Traditional and 
nontraditional theoretical and empirical approaches; issues surrounding children’s cognitive, language, and 
psychosocial development, plus educational attainment explored from a socio-cultural perspective. Includes 
discussion of racial stereotypes, familial interactions, social policy, the media, and peer groups. Prerequisites: 
Introductory Psych, Developmental, Human Development, Research Methods courses. Juniors and Seniors 
only. Instructor: Wilbourn. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 420S, Human Development
436S. Clinical Interventions with Children and Families. SS, W Study of techniques used by clinical 
psychologists to treat and prevent psychological disorders of childhood. Focus on a) understanding major types 
of clinical interventions, b) how clinical psychologists develop, implement, and evaluate interventions, c) ethical 
issues in treating children and families, d) integration of research and practice in the treatment and prevention 
of childhood psychological disorders. Prerequisites: Psychology 105 or 207, and a research methods course or 
statistics course. Instructor: Puffer. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
437S. Language Development. SS Focuses on a fundamentally unique human ability: learning language. 
Covers how young children first learn language, including: 1) how children figure out what sounds their language 
includes; 2) how infants learn words & their meanings; and (3) what kind of processes help babies figure out 
the grammar of their particular native language. Since young children understand more than they can say, 
this course also covers the methods available for figuring out what they know, based on experimental and 
observational data. Students will discuss and present recent research articles and new study ideas. Instructor: 
Bergelson. One course. C-L: Linguistics 437S
438S. Children’s Peer Relations. SS Examination of the empirical literature with emphasis on the 
functions that peers serve for children, the developmental course of these relationships, the clinical ramifications 
and possible explanations for inadequate peer relations (including an examination of the family’s role), and 
interventions used to improve children’s relationships with their peers. Regular opportunities to analyze, 
critique, and synthesize primary research literature. Instructor: Asher. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
444S. Neuroscience Service Learning: Brain Connections. NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Neuroscience 444S
450S. The Psychology of Trauma and Memory. NS, R, SS, STS Inquiry into how memory changes in 
and supports the effects of traumatic events, and its relation to current diagnosis and treatment of posttraumatic 
stress disorder. Examination of differences across cultures in understanding trauma and responses to it. 
Integration of behavioral theory and observation with its neural basis, including neuroimaging. Topics include 
ongoing debates about accuracy, narrative coherence, and involuntary memory. Levels of analysis range from 
neural substrates, through behavior and thought processes to the social construction of memory and trauma. 
Research projects use primary and secondary materials, empirical observations, or reanalysis of existing data. 
Instructor: Rubin. One course.
451S. Autobiographical Memory. NS, R, SS A review and critical analysis of the literature, theory, and 
empirical study of autobiographical memory within cognitive psychology and neuroscience. Levels of analysis 
from the cultural, individual, neural systems, and neurobiological are integrated. Topics include accuracy, 
functions including planning for future actions, and effects of neural damage. Emphasis on the reasoning, 
research designs, and methods used in examining autobiographical memory. Research projects use primary and 
secondary materials, empirical observations, or reanalysis of existing data. Instructor: Rubin. One course. C-L: 
Neuroscience 451S
453S. Mind Wandering and Inattention. SS Introduction to theoretical and practical aspects of research 
in cognitive science. Classes and readings will focus on popular topics in the domain of mind wandering and 



 Psychology (PSY)670

inattention, with an emphasis on the research process. This course will focus on critically evaluating primary-
source material, and on honing presentation and writing skills. Prerequisite: Psychology 102 and any one of the 
following courses: Psychology 201L; Statistical Science 101, 102, 104, 111, or 250; Mathematics 342; or Sociology 
333. Instructor: Seli. One course.
461S. Neurobiology of Learning and Memory. NS An active, team-based learning seminar addressing the 
neurobiological mechanisms of learning and memory. Focusing on the cellular basis of information encoding 
and retrieval, this course enables you to evaluate contemporary findings, design experiments and synthesize 
and communicate conclusions. Prerequisite: Psychology 257, 275, 276 or Biology 223/Neuroscience 223 or 
permission of instructor. Instructor: Newpher. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 461S
462S. Neuroscience Applications for Everyday Decision Making. NS, SS, STS Advanced seminar 
that evaluates whether neuroscientific research can improve human decision making and make the world a 
better place for individuals and society. Focus on a broad range of decisions and behaviors related to growing up 
and growing old, spending money, judging and interacting with others, maintaining emotional, cognitive, and 
physical health, and protecting the planet. Reading and discussion of primary scientific sources and scientific 
reviews. Must have basic knowledge of human neuroimaging (especially fMRI). Prerequisite: Neuroscience 212/
Psychology 257, Neuroscience/Psychology 258, Neuroscience/Psychology 280, or Neuroscience 382/Psychology 
303. Instructor: G. Samanez-Larkin. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 462S
469S. Cognitive Control and the Prefrontral Cortex. NS, R, W Review and critical analysis of current 
and historical perspectives on functional neuroanatomy of the prefrontal cortex. Discussion is informed by 
anatomical, neuropsychological, neurological, neuroimaging, animal models, and computational approaches. 
Open to juniors and seniors majoring in Psychology or Neuroscience, and to graduate students. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Egner. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 469S
470S. Cognitive Neuroscience of Memory. NS Research on the neural correlates of memory in humans. 
Neuropsychological studies with brain-damaged patients and functional neuroimaging studies with healthy 
individuals. Cognitive neuroscience models of memory, including episodic memory, working memory, semantic 
memory, priming, and procedural memory. Prerequisite: Psychology 102 or Psychology 106/Neuroscience 101 
or Psychology 107/Neuroscience 102. Instructor: Cabeza. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 470S
471S. Reward and Addiction. NS, W Biological and psychological mechanisms of reward and addiction 
from a “molecules to mind” perspective. Topics include: neural mechanisms of reward, vulnerability to 
addiction, self-medication, addiction as a learning process, animal models of addiction, gateway drugs, roles of 
stress and impulsivity, adolescence, genetic vs. environmental predisposition, neural alterations resulting from 
drug intake. Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107 or Psychology 
275/Biology 224/Neuroscience 201. Instructor: Schramm-Sapyta. One course. C-L: Pharmacology and Cancer 
Biology 471S, Neuroscience 471S
474S. Biological Psychology of Human Development. R, SS, W Multidisciplinary perspectives bearing 
on key processes in human development from infancy through old age; the way that biological and psychological 
processes act together in normal and pathological behavior and development. Clinical case material and 
videotapes. Open to juniors and seniors only, preferably Psychology majors and students in the Program in 
Human Development. Instructor: Thompson. One course. C-L: Human Development
477S. Biology of Nervous System Diseases. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 421S; also C-L: Neuroscience 
421S
478S. Motivation, Action, Choice: Neural and Behavioral Mechanisms. NS, W Behavioral analysis 
and neural mechanisms underlying goal-directed and voluntary actions, how they are driven by needs and 
desires of the organism and controlled by cognitive processes that provide a rich representation of self and 
world. Discussion of models of behavioral and cognitive control and their neural mechanisms and implications 
of such models for psychiatric disorders, consciousness, free will, and responsibility. Participation in class 
discussion and short weekly writing assignments required. Prerequisites: Exploring the Mind courses or 
Prerequisite: Neuroscience 101/Psychology 106 or Neuroscience 102/Psychology 107 and at least one other 
psychology or neuroscience class. Instructor: Yin. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 478S
479S. Auditory Neuroscience - From Sound to Music. NS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 425S; also 
C-L: Music 425S



Psychology (PSY) 671

490A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Psychology. Topics differ by session. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Psychology. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study on a previously approved topic under 
the supervision of a faculty member and resulting in a significant product that promotes understanding or 
application of psychological science. Senior year fall. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
492. Independent Study. Individual non-research directed study on a previously approved topic under 
the supervision of a faculty member and resulting in a significant product that promotes understanding or 
application of psychological science. Senior year spring. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
493. Research Independent Study. R See Psychology 393. Senior year fall. Prerequisite: Two psychology 
courses. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Psychology 393. Senior year spring. Prerequisite: Two 
psychology courses. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
496. Distinction Thesis Workshop. W This graded course unit accompanies the writing of the Graduation 
with Distinction thesis. It is restricted to distinction candidates, and is specifically geared at preparing students 
for pursuing research at the graduate school level and beyond. Topics cover all phases of research project 
development, scientific article writing, and poster and oral presentation. In addition, the course includes a 
variety of professional development sessions, introducing the students to the publication process, graduate 
school considerations, and grant writing. The students are required to produce several written works and oral 
presentation. Department consent required. Instructor: Egner, Wilbourn, or staff. One course.
499. Current Research in Neuroscience. EI, NS, R, W One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 499
500S. The Cinematic Depiction of Psychopathology. ALP, NS Critically explore depictions of mental 
illness in modern cinema and television, and the extent to which they capture our emerging understanding of 
dysfunction in core neural circuits supporting normal behavior. Prerequisite: Psychology/Neuroscience 277. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Hariri. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 500S
510S. Developmental Psychopathology. EI, R, SS, STS Examines emotional and behavioral disorders 
in childhood and adolescence from a developmental perspective. Issues addressed include biological, cognitive, 
familial, and social aspects of the disorders and relevant risk and protective factors. Open only to graduate 
students and advanced undergraduate students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
561S. Evolution, Cognition, and Society. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary Anthropology 561S
575. Brain and Language. NS, R One course. C-L: see Linguistics 510; also C-L: Neuroscience 510
580. The Biological Basis of Music. One course. C-L: see Neurobiology 559; also C-L: Philosophy 559
590. Special Topics in Psychology. Advanced topics vary by semester and section from the areas of 
Psychology: Abnormal/Health, Biological, Cognitive, Developmental or Social. Consent of instructor and/or 
specific prerequisites may be required for specific offerings. Open to Undergraduate and Graduate/Professional 
students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
601S. Psychology Teaching Seminar. SS Exploration of issues relevant to teaching in psychology 
and related disciplines. Focus on a variety of pedagogical issues: course development, teaching strategies, 
preparation of materials, evaluation, classroom management. Strong emphasis also on ethical issues bearing on 
pedagogy. Open to undergraduates serving, or scheduled to serve, as teaching assistants in psychology, as well 
as to graduate students. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Hard, G. Samanez-Larkin, or staff. One course.
603S. Teachers as Scientists: Psychological Research in the Classroom. EI, R, SS, STS How can 
psychology help us understand and improve education? In this course, students will develop skills as both 
critical consumers and producers of empirical research on teaching and learning. Students will develop original, 
testable hypotheses in the domain of teaching and learning and design ethical studies to test those hypotheses. 
This is a course for undergraduate and graduate students who are interested in teaching, education more 



 Psychology (PSY)672

generally, and/or in the application of psychology to real-world problems. Undergraduate students must have 
fulfilled P&N major requirements in methods and statistics. Prerequisite: For undergraduates, any one of the 
following statistics courses: Psychology 201L, Statistical Science 101, 102, 104, 111, 250 or Mathematics 342, and 
any one of the following methods courses: Psychology 202 or 301, 302L, 303L, 304, 305, 306, 308L, 309, 309K, 
310, 313. No prerequisites for students with graduate standing. Instructor: Hard. One course.
605S. Obesity and Eating Disorders. CCI, NS, R, SS A review of obesity and of the major clinical eating 
disorders (including binge eating disorder, bulimia nervosa and anorexia nervosa) and their pathophysiology, 
and their treatments. Prerequisite: Introductory Biology. Instructor: Staff. One course.
607S. Personality, Stress, and Disease. NS, SS, STS The role of psychosocial factors in the development 
and course of physical disease. Both epidemiological and laboratory-based research considered. Become familiar 
with major behavioral medicine research studies that have made significant contributions to our understanding 
of the role of psychosocial factors in medical illness and develop skills necessary for critical evaluation of 
research on psychosocial factors and disease. Appropriate for students with interests in medical careers or in 
health psychology. Instructor: R. Williams. One course.
609S. Psychosocial Determinants of Health. SS Provides an in-depth understanding of psychosocial 
determinants of health. Emphasis on the ways psychological factors interact with social, cultural, economic, 
and environmental contexts of health. Topics include impact of social integration, socioeconomic position, 
discrimination, health behaviors, and affective states on health outcomes. Students will gain competency 
through lectures, discussions, written work, and oral presentations. Prerequisite: Psychology 104 or 105, 
Research Methods. Open to juniors, seniors and graduate students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
610S. The Psychology of Mindfulness Meditation: Theory, Research, and Practice. CCI, NS, 
SS Mindfulness meditation in relation to psychological and physical health. Traditional Buddhist teachings and 
contemporary Western perspectives on mindfulness. Survey of empirical research, including controlled trials 
and studies of basic mechanisms and processes through self-report, psychophysiological, and neuroimaging 
methods. Use of mindfulness practices in behavioral and other psychotherapies. Includes experiential learning 
through meditation practices in class and for homework assignments, as well as lecture and discussion. 
Readings mostly original journal articles and book chapters. Prerequisites: Psychology 102, 105, or 106 
desirable. Open to graduate and advanced undergraduate students. Instructor: Smoski or staff. One course.
611. Global Mental Health. CCI, NS, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Global Health 660; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 611, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 660, Human Rights
613S. Clinical Interventions: Treating Emotion Dysregulation and Impulsivity Using DBT. 
SS Introduction to the basic principles, strategies and methods of an empirically-based clinical intervention, 
Dialectical Behavior Therapy (DBT), a cognitive behavioral based treatment for individuals with severe 
emotional dysregulation and impulsivity. Seminar includes didactics, discussion, video demonstrations, skills 
practice, and role-plays, as well as experiential homework assignments in order to further understanding of 
the theoretical underpinnings of DBT, biopsychosocial model of psychopathology, case formulation, and skills 
needed for conducting both individual DBT therapy and the DBT skills training group (e.g., mindfulness. 
emotion regulation). Prerequisites: Psychology 105. Instructor: S. Samanez-Larkin. One course.
625S. Motives, Goals, and Social Behavior. SS Covers a variety of topics involving the motivations 
underlying a variety of social behaviors (such as interpersonal relationships, stereotyping, and achievement) 
and the social and psychological processes involved when people try to regulate their own motives, thoughts, 
emotions, and behavior. Reading and discussion of literature on current theory and research on motivation, 
goal-directed behavior, and self-regulation. Instructor: Shah. One course.
627S. Stereotypes and Stigma. CCI, SS Experimental research in stereotyping and stigma; readings from 
psychology, public health, and sociological perspectives on issues related to ethnicity, gender, and social class. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
654S. Psychology of Aging. SS, STS An interdisciplinary approach to the study of aging. Psychological 
development in middle adulthood and old age as linked to disciplines such as Public Policy, Sociology, Geriatric 
Medicine & Psychiatry. Age-related changes in well-being, cognition, personality, and social relationships. 
Real-life issues that will affect most people in the future (e.g., successful retirement, decreasing one’s risk of 
dementia). Open to undergraduate and graduate students. Prerequisites: none. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Psychology (PSY) 673

668S. Everyday Cognition. SS Key cognitive processes (e.g., attention, memory, comprehension, problem 
solving) and how they work in everyday settings. Cognition in classrooms, courtrooms, hospitals, grocery 
stores, kitchens, jobs, sports, and dance. Focus on Medical Cognition, Courtroom Cognition, and Memory for 
Movement. For each setting--successful vs. mediocre performance, types of errors, and applications. Visits by 
experts (e.g., pharmacists, doctors, judges, lawyers, chefs, choreographers) to discuss the cognitive processes 
essential for their jobs. Instructor: Day. One course.
670S. Language, Brain, and Human Behavior. R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 502S
671S. Nature and Treatment of Eating Disorders Across the Lifespan. R, SS Study of atypical and 
typical development of conscious somatic sensation, i.e. how individuals sense and understand body signals and 
how extremes of sensitivity may form part of the core phenomenology of disorders such as anorexia nervosa, 
pediatric obesity, and autism spectrum disorders Study of detailed narratives of patients have served as a 
springboard for novel hypotheses about human function. Readings alternate between primary journal articles 
to patient memoirs and narratives. Students interview patients struggling with eating disorders, children who 
binge eat, and children with high functioning autism, among other clinical conditions. Juniors, Seniors and 
Graduate students. Instructor: Zucker. One course.
681S. Genetics and Environment in Abnormal Behavior. EI, NS, SS Introduces students to an 
emerging topic in behavioral science: the interaction between genes and environments. Evaluates research 
showing that genes influence susceptibility to the environmental causes of abnormal behavior, and research 
showing that genes’ connections to behaviors depend on environmental experiences. Readings are primary 
journal articles. Topics include the design and analysis of genetic research into mental disorders, and ethical 
issues stemming from genetic research into human behavior. Prior coursework in statistics/research methods, 
genetics, and/or abnormal psychology is desirable. Consent of instructor required. Instructors: Caspi and 
Moffitt. One course. C-L: Science & Society
684S. Hormones, Brain, and Cognition. NS, R Current research on how hormones modify and modulate 
cognitive processes across the lifespan. Consent of instructor required. One course. Instructor: C. Williams. One 
course. C-L: Neuroscience 584S
685S. Biological Pathways to Psychopathology. NS Introduces students to emerging methodologies for 
understanding the biological pathways of psychopathology. Evaluates research showing that the integration 
of psychology, neuroimaging, pharmacology and genetics can illuminate specific biological pathways that 
help shape risk for and emergence of psychopathology. Readings are primary journal articles. Topics include 
the design and analysis of multimodal research (fMRI, PET, pharmacology, molecular genetics) examining 
the biological underpinnings of behavioral traits relevant to psychopathology. Prerequisite: Psychology 277/
Neuroscience 277 or Instructor consent required. Instructor: Hariri. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 685S
686S. Principles of Neuroimmunology. NS Bidirectional communication between the brain and immune 
system, in disease and during normal function/homeostasis. Historical foundations of the field in disorders 
such as multiple sclerosis and HIV; the anatomy of CNS-immune connections; blood-brain-barrier function and 
dysfunction; leukocyte trafficking, surveillance, and infiltration of the CNS; cellular players including peripheral 
vs. CNS-resident immune cells and antigen presentation; neuroinflammation and neurodegenerative disease; 
recent literature highlighting the critical role of immune molecules in neural development and lifelong plasticity. 
Instructor consent required for undergraduates. Instructor: Bilbo. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 686S
690S. Special Topics in Psychology. Topics vary by semester and section from the different areas of 
Psychology: Abnormal, Biological, Cognitive, Developmental or Social. Consent of instructor and/or specific 
prerequisites may be required for specific offerings. Open to Undergraduate as well as Graduate/Professional 
students. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major

For the AB Degree
Major Requirements. Eleven courses in psychology are required for the major. The major is devised to 

provide breadth, a small group course in psychology, one additional upper-level course, and familiarity with the 
quantitative techniques and research methods used in psychology. Neither AP nor IB credit will allow students to 
place out of Psychology 101 (Introductory Psychology). 



 Psychology (PSY)674

For breadth, the student is required to take Psychology 101 (Introductory Psychology) and at least three 
survey courses that cover major areas of the field. One of these survey courses must be Psychology 106/107 
(Biological Bases of Behavior) or Psychology 102 (Cognitive Psychology), and one must be Psychology 105 
(Abnormal Psychology), Psychology 103 (Developmental Psychology), or Psychology 104 (Social Psychology). 
Students seeking additional breadth may count up to four of these survey courses toward the major. Psychology 
101 is strongly recommended as the first course taken in the major as it provides a foundation for all other courses; 
the survey courses should be taken next as they provide a foundation for upper-level courses in each area.

For instruction in small groups, the student is to take at least one seminar. It is recommended that the 
seminar be taken in an area where a survey course was completed.

For one additional upper-level course, the student is to take a course at the 300 level or above. It 
is recommended that this course be taken in an area where a survey course was completed. Please note that 
neither independent study courses (Psychology 391, 392, 491, and 492) nor research independent study courses 
(Psychology 393, 394, 493, and 494) may be used to satisfy this requirement. In addition, the distinction thesis 
workshop (Psychology 496) may not be used to satisfy this requirement

In order to satisfy the requirements for coursework in quantitative techniques and research methods 
in psychology, each student will take Psychology 204L (Quantitative Research Methods and Statistics for 
Psychological Science 1) and Psychology 205L (Quantitative Research Methods and Statistics for Psychological 
Science 2). Other courses may be substituted only with advance permission of the director of undergraduate 
studies. Neither Psychology 204L nor Psychology 205L fulfills prerequisites for advanced coursework in the 
Department of Statistical Science; please review the Statistical Science website for the prerequisites for courses 
in that department. Finally, students may not use introductory-level statistics classes taken in Statistical Science 
to satisfy elective requirements for the Psychology AB. Psychology 101, Psychology 204L (Quantitative Research 
Methods and Statistics for Psychological Science 1), and Psychology 205L (Quantitative Research Methods and 
Statistics for Psychological Science 2) all should be completed prior to the end of the junior year, as they provide 
the foundation for all subsequent coursework, and will allow students to benefit most from their upper-level 
courses.

Of the eleven courses required for the major, at least nine must be taken at Duke; others, if approved, may 
count toward the 34.0 course credits needed for graduation but will not count toward the major. Information is 
also available at https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/undergraduate/majors-minors.

For the BS Degree
The BS degree requires completion of all requirements for the AB degree plus additional courses in the 

quantitative studies (QS) and/or natural sciences (NS). 
To satisfy the quantitative studies/natural sciences elective requirement, students must take five elective 

courses, selected from an approved list, that meet the following criteria: (a) classes come from at least two 
departments, and (b) at least three of the five are at or above the 200 level. Note: Psychology courses not used 
to fulfill AB requirements (including up to two semesters of research independent study credit) may be counted 
toward the five, but courses cross-listed with psychology and another department do not count as a second 
department. Additional research methods courses may be counted toward the elective requirement only with 
prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies. A list of currently approved classes for the quantitative 
studies/natural sciences elective requirement may be found in the undergraduate section of the Psychology and 
Neuroscience website.

The Minor
Requirements. Five courses in psychology including Psychology 101 (Introductory Psychology) and at least 

two survey courses that cover major areas of the field. One of these survey courses must be Psychology 106/107 
(Biological Bases of Behavior) or Psychology 102 (Cognitive Psychology), and one must either be Psychology 105 
(Abnormal Psychology), Psychology 103 (Developmental Psychology), or Psychology 104 (Social Psychology). At 
least one of the remaining courses must be beyond the survey level (i.e., above 107). However, students may not 
use introductory-level statistical science courses to satisfy elective requirements for the psychology minor.

Independent Study
A program of individual non-research-directed study may be carried out by an arrangement with a faculty 

supervisor and enrollment in Psychology 391, 392, 491, or 492. This study should result in a significant product 

https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/undergraduate/majors-minors
https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/
https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/


Psychology (PSY) 675

that promotes understanding or application of psychological science. At most only two independent study courses 
(whether research- or non-research directed) may count toward the major.

Research Independent Study
A program of individualized readings or an empirical research project may be carried out by arrangement 

with a faculty supervisor and enrollment in Psychology 393, 394, 493, or 494. Psychology 203 serves as an excellent 
introduction to research independent study. A written plan for the program must be approved by the supervisor 
and the director of undergraduate studies. At most only two independent study courses (whether research- or 
non-research directed) may count toward the major

Graduation with Distinction Program
The Graduation with Distinction program is based on a special project that requires original empirical 

research, usually developed through completion of research independent study courses. With approval from the 
director of undergraduate studies, a critical analysis of a problem in the field based on an extensive literature 
review may be substituted for an empirical research study. The project is to be summarized in a carefully written 
thesis to be the subject of an oral examination. The opportunity to write a thesis and qualify for Graduation 
with Distinction is open only to those majoring in psychology. Applicants must have an overall GPA of 3.0 and 
a GPA in psychology of 3.5, without rounding, by graduation. Neither independent study classes in psychology, 
nor research independent study classes in psychology, nor the distinction thesis workshop, are included when 
calculating the GPA.

An application to the Graduation with Distinction program should be submitted by the last day of regular 
class registration for the term in which the thesis will be defended (for a fall defense, Fall registration in April; for 
a spring defense, Spring registration in November). The application must include names of the three people who 
will serve on the student’s committee. The committee chair generally holds a primary or joint graduate training 
faculty appointment in the Psychology department. (Other department faculty may be able to serve as chairs with 
special approval from the director of undergraduate studies or with another faculty member serving as the chair 
of record.) The second committee member may hold a primary, joint, or secondary appointment in the Psychology 
department. The final committee member may be a department faculty member, a post-doc or graduate student 
in the Psychology department, a faculty member from another department at Duke, or a faculty member from 
another institution. (A current list of faculty with primary, joint, and secondary appointments may be found under 
the People tab at https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/.)  

Students interested in applying for Graduation with Distinction will register for two consecutive research 
independent study courses (393, 394, 493, 494). Students must register for the first research independent study 
before submitting their application for Graduation with Distinction. Ordinarily, the same faculty member will 
serve as the student’s mentor both semesters. Candidates for Graduation with Distinction must also enroll in 496, a 
full-credit course focusing on the conduct of psychological research, ethics in research, professional development, 
and especially science writing in order to prepare a quality thesis; 496 is only offered spring semester. Near the 
end of the final semester, candidates should submit copies  of the thesis to their committee members. The student 
will then convene the faculty committee for an oral examination of the student and a decision as to whether the 
overall performance qualifies for Graduation with Distinction. An exceptional thesis combined with outstanding 
performance in psychology may qualify a student for the Zener Award. Graduation with Distinction research 
projects are displayed at the spring undergraduate research poster fair, Visible Thinking.

Public Policy Studies
Professor Kelley, Dean of the Sanford School of Public Policy; Professor Napoli, Senior Associate Dean for Fac-
ulty and Research; Professor Krupp, Associate Dean for Academic Programs; Professor Gibson-Davis, Direc-
tor of Undergraduate Studies; Senior Lecturer Admay, Assistant Director of Undergraduate Studies; Profes-
sors Adler (Law), Ariely (Economics), Bail (Sociology), Balleisen (History), Bradley (Law), Brownell, Chatterji 
(Business Administration), Clotfelter, Darity, Dodge, Feaver (Political Science), Fleishman (Law), Garrett (Law), 
Gennetian, Gibson-Davis, Goss, Harris (Sociology), Hillygus (Political Science), Jentleson, Keister (Sociology), 
Krishna, MacLean (History), McClain (Political Science), McClellan (Business Administration), Merli, Merson 
(Global Health), Munger (Political Science), Napoli, Nechyba (Economics), Pattanayak, Pfaff, Pizer, D. Price (Po-
litical Science), V. Price, D. Siegel (Political Science), Sitkin (Business Administration), Sloan (Economics), D. 

https://psychandneuro.duke.edu/


 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)676

Taylor, Thomas (Economics), Vincent (Environment), Ubel (Business Administration), Weinthal (Environment), 
Whetten, Wibbels (Political Science), and Wiener (Law); Associate Professors Bennear (Environment), Bermeo, 
Carnes, Gassman-Pines, Haga (Medicine), Jeuland, Mohanan, Mullin (Environment), Peck, Rangel, Robertson 
(Psychiatry), and Zafar (Medicine); Assistant Professors Barnes, Johnson, Komisarow, Meeks, Miles, Pearson, 
Rose, Sexton, SoRelle, Sorenson, and Wong (Pediatrics); Research Professors Lansford, Murray (Environment), 
and Vaupel; Associate Research Professors Babinski, Gifford, Philipsen, and Muschkin; Assistant Research Pro-
fessor Boucher; Professors of the Practice Adair, A. Brown, F. Fernholz, Gill, Hoffman, Kelly, McCorkle, Pick-
us, Pomerantz, Rogerson, Schanzer, Shukla, T. Taylor, and Yamey (Global Health); Associate Professors of the 
Practice Antepli, Hildebrand, Mirovitskaya, Perault, and Profeta; Adjunct Professors Burness, Hollowell, and 
Kaligotla; Adjunct Associate Professor Ewing; Senior Lecturers Admay and Owen; Lecturers Mlyn and Suther-
land; Senior Lecturing Fellow R. Fernholz; Visiting Professor Swartz; Visiting Assistant Professors McKethan and 
Schewel; Visiting Professors of the Practice Allin, Boehmer, Brook, Eacho, Hemming, Holmes, Katzenelson, Li-
tow, Nichols, Quinterno, and Schoenfeld; Visiting Associate Professor of the Practice Angrist; Adjunct Instructors 
Applebome, Barber, Beasley, Bowers, Clabby, Cohen, Dhakal, Dickey, Dukes, Goldsmith, Graham, Fikes, Hagy, 
Johnson, Katzenstein, Jaslow, Lavelle, Lempke, McHugh, McCartney, Meyer, Moreau, Nash, Owens, A. Pizer, K. 
Price, Sherlock, Sirota, Sisson, Sperling, Stansbury, Stencel, Sullivan, Tamari, Weddington, Wilson-Hartgrove, 
and Zapotoczny; Professors Emeriti Chafe (History), Conrad, Cook, Glenday, Harris, James, Joseph, Korstad, 
Kuniholm, Ladd, Lethem, Mickiewicz, and Schroeder (Law)

A major is available in this department.
Courses in public policy are open to all students providing that any prerequisites are met.

Courses in Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics may vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
110. Information, Society & Culture: Bass Connections Gateway. CZ, STS One course. C-L: see 
Information Science + Studies 110; also C-L: Philosophy 110, Computer Science 110
120. Undergraduates Internship Requirement. Field work in a chosen policy area with pre-approval of 
the Internship Coordinator. Must submit approval form, five page memo, and self-evaluation form two weeks 
after internship ends. Recommended prerequisite: Public Policy 155D, 301, 302/equivalent, 303D/equivalent. 
Statistical Science 101, and approval from Internship Director. The Alternative Pathway to Internship 
Completion program allows students to complete their internship after completing four core courses. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff.
123. History of the Present. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 124
125A. Undergraduate Internship. Field work in chosen policy area with pre-approval of the Internship 
Coordinator: must submit approval form, five page memo, and self-evaluation. Prerequisite: Public Policy 155, 
301, 302, 303 (or equivalent), Statistical Science 101, and approval from Internship Coordinator. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff.
155D. Introduction to Policy Analysis. SS Basic concepts of analytical thinking including quantitative 
methods for assessing the probabilities of outcomes and appraising policy alternatives. Illustrated by problems 
faced by busy decision makers in government, business, law, medicine. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Global 
Health
160. Intro to the History of Modern Warfare. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 114
161. Introduction to the History of Law and Governance. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 110
162. Introduction to Human Rights: Gateway for the Human Rights Certificate. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
EI One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 104; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 113, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 104, Human Rights
165. Introduction to the United States Health Care System. SS Overview of key health policy issues in 
the United States. Topics include: (1) sources of morbidity and mortality; (2) access to health care; (3) financing 
of health care including an overview of how health insurance works, Medicare and Medicaid and why there are 
uninsured persons and to what effect; (4) health care quality; (5) end-of-life issues and care in advanced stage 
illness; (6) the role of non-profit versus for-profit ownership of health care facilities and to what effect; (8) long 
term care and care-giving issues; and (9) the impact of social phenomenon such as income inequality, social 
class and culture on health care. Instructor: Boucher. One course. C-L: Science & Society 165



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 677

166D. Introduction to Security, Peace and Conflict. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 160D
167FS. Citizenship, Patriotism, & Identity. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 150FS; also 
C-L: Political Science 150FS
170S. The Documentary Experience: A Video Approach. ALP, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 105S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 106S, History 125S, Political Science 105S, Visual 
and Media Studies 106S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
175S. Gateway Seminar: Civil Rights and Asian Americans. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 183S; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 187S, African & African American Studies 133S, 
International Comparative Studies 183S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 183S
176S. Gateway Seminar: The European Union: History and Prospects. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see History 176S
177. Private Wealth and Public Giving: A Modern History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see 
History 123; also C-L: Study of Ethics 123, International Comparative Studies 123
178. Israel/Palestine: Comparative Perspectives. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 148; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 244, Environment 147, Jewish Studies 148, 
Political Science 159, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 148, Ethics Elective, Islamic 
Studies, Human Rights
181FS. Human Rights and World Politics. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 129FS; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 128FS, Political Science 176FS, Human Rights
182. Public Speaking: Policy Advocacy and Communication. W One course. C-L: see Writing 182
183FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: 
see Education 112FS; also C-L: Russian 121FS, Science & Society 112FS, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 112FS, Human Rights
184FS. Synthetic Genomics: Science, Policy and Ethics. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Genome 
Sciences and Policy 138FS
185FS. Drugs and the Law. SS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 153FS; also C-L: Science & Society 153FS
186FS. Ethical Implications of Genetic and Genomic Research. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Molecular Genetics & Microbiology 120FS; also C-L: Human Rights
187FS. Globalization and Corporate Citizenship. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 160FS; also 
C-L: History 127FS, Economics 112FS
190A. Public Policy Special Topics Away. Selected topics away. Transfer grading only. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
190FS. Focus Program Introductory Special Topics in Public Policy. Introductory and basic topics 
in public policy. Topics vary each semester. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
190S. Special Topics in Public Policy. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 196FS; also C-L: African & African American Studies 196FS, Global Health 196FS, Psychology 
196FS, Sociology 196FS, Cultural Anthropology 196FS, Science & Society
199FS. Risks, Rewards, Rules, and Tools: Science Law and Policy. CCI, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: 
see Science & Society 199FS
201A. Environmental Policy in Europe: Duke in Berlin. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
295A; also C-L: German 320A, International Comparative Studies
203. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Education 201; also C-L: Political Science 213, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 201
204A. Political Philosophy of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Philosophy 237A; also 
C-L: Political Science 297A, Economics 303A



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)678

205. United States Foreign Policy I: From World War II to Vietnam War. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Basic 
assumptions about international interests and purposes of United States foreign policy and the means by which 
they have been pursued from the origins of the Cold War to the war in Vietnam. Focus on crucial operational 
premises in the ‘defining moments’ of United States diplomatic history. Policy-making models, politics of foreign 
policy, global environment within which United States policy is made, and uses of history. Special attention to 
the origins of the Cold War and the Vietnam War. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 375
206. United States Foreign Policy II: From Vietnam War to the Present. CCI, CZ, SS Examination of 
basic assumptions about international interests and purposes of United States foreign policy and the means by 
which they have been pursued from the end of the Vietnam War to the Clinton administration. Focus on crucial 
operational premises in the “defining moments” of United States diplomatic history. Various policy-making 
models, politics of foreign policy, global environment within which United States policy is made, and uses of 
history. Special attention to the Cold War, the Arab-Israeli wars, and the Gulf War. Continuation of Public Policy 
Studies 205 (recommended but not required). Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 376
206S. Introduction to Engaged Citizenship and Social Change (Gateway Course). CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Education 201S; also C-L: Political Science 213S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 201S, Human Rights
207. Development and Africa. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 307; 
also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 307, International Comparative Studies 308, Marxism and Society
208S. Language and Politics: Global Perspectives. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 471S; also 
C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 484S, Sociology 471S
209S. Human Rights and Legal Redress: Seeking Justice through Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 195S
210A. Frontier City Berlin: Facing History’s Great Challenges. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see German 
366A; also C-L: History 334A, Political Science 260A
211-20. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Structural Focus. QS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 315-20; also C-L: Environment 365-20, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 315-20
211-60. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Environmental Focus. QS, 
STS One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 315-60; also C-L: Environment 365-60, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 315-60
212. Globalization and Public Policy. R, SS How the various aspects of globalization affect, and are 
affected by public policy at the international, national and local levels. Development of an analytic framework 
for thinking about globalization and its core concepts, major institutions and political dynamics; survey of a 
range of major policy areas affected by globalization; focus on a policy area of particular interest. Instructor: 
Jentleson. One course. C-L: Political Science 358, Islamic Studies, International Comparative Studies
213S. Geopolitics and Culture: Islamic States from the Ottomans to ISIS. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 208S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 217S, History 379S
214. South Africa: Past and Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 214; also C-L: History 208, Political Science 221, Human Rights
216S. The US Border and its Borderlands. CCI, CZ, EI, SS, W Examines the challenges and 
opportunities of the US border from a geopolitical perspective. Detailed review of how the current US 
boundaries were set, and how this shapes current attitudes and conflicts. Assessment of various means of border 
control, including visa issues, border walls and port of entry screening. Cultural and historical comparison of 
two borderlands, Seattle-Vancouver and San Diego-Tijuana, and the EU experience. Overall course theme: Can 
the border effectively and ethically screen noxious elements without blocking legitimate and necessary travel 
and trade. Specific skills taught: policy memo writing and oral briefing strategies. Instructor: Kelly. One course. 
C-L: Political Science 343S, International Comparative Studies 359S, International Comparative Studies, Latin 
American Studies
217SA. Theory and Practice: People, Places and Policy Cases. SS Talks by Congress members, 
legislative staff members, interest group leaders, journalists, and other members of the public policy community 



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 679

in Washington. Visits to government buildings, historical sites, and other policy-rich attractions in the nation’s 
capital. Discussion and written assignments require analysis and linkages between “real world” of policy practice 
and theories and concepts from political science and public policy studies. Offered through the Duke in DC 
program. Instructor: Goss. One course. C-L: Political Science 240SA
218S. Conflict Analysis in Africa (Case Studies). CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 310S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 310S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 218S, Human Rights
219D. The Modern Regulatory State. CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 365D; also C-L: 
Environment 365D, Political Science 340D
220. Immigrant Dreams, U.S. Realities: Immigration Policy History. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. 
C-L: see History 352; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 352, Human Rights
222. International Political Economy. CCI, R, SS Examination of the politics of international economic 
relations from the perspective of both advanced industrialized and developing countries. Focus on international 
trade; money and finance; multinational corporations and global value chains; foreign aid and the politics of 
development; distributional consequences of economic globalization; and the role of power and institutions 
in the governance of world economy. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 350, International 
Comparative Studies 350
223. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 399; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 399, 
International Comparative Studies 399, Markets and Management Studies
225S. Women in the Public Sphere: History, Theory and Practice. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 385S
228. Politics of Authoritarian Regimes. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 228; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
228S. Documentary and Policy: How Documentary Influences Policy. ALP One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 272S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 386S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 272S
231. Human Rights in Theory and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 272; 
also C-L: Philosophy 262, International Comparative Studies 272, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 262, Documentary Studies, Ethics Elective, Global Health, Human Rights
232S. The Insurgent South: Movements for Social Change. CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 357S
233D. Are Things Getting Better? The Question of Progress in World Affairs. R, SS, W One course. 
C-L: see Political Science 234D; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 252D
233S. Influential Scientists and Policy Leaders in Science Policy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 238S; also C-L: History 301S
236. Globalization and History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 201
237S. Research in International Policy Issues. CCI, R, SS Surveys several issues displaying different 
forms or policy responses in various geographical regions and cultures. Examples include: competition over 
energy resources, design of international organization, trends of human migration, privatization of security, 
and patterns of economic inequality. An interdisciplinary approach with attention to political, economic and 
social patterns. The goal is to introduce international policy issues that remain unsolved, while understanding 
how present-day relationships and policies are shaped by the past. Particularly useful for students looking for 
international topics for honors theses or other research projects. Instructor: Johnson. One course. C-L: Political 
Science 225S
238SA. Media and Power in Washington. SS Examines relationship between the press and government 
in defining the national agenda. How does news media in Washington work? How do various centers of 
power—in Congress, the federal bureaucracy, lobbyists, think tanks—jostle for advantage and a voice? Follow 
contemporary news events, read into history of relations between government and press, and meet journalists 
engaged in deciphering the stream of message, policy and politics. Taught in Duke in DC program. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 214SA



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)680

239. Ethnic Conflict. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 227; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 322
240. The Politics of International Economic Relations: America in the World Economy. CCI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 250; also C-L: Markets and Management Studies
241. Multi-Method Approaches to Social and Policy Research. QS, R, SS An overview of social 
research methods in public policy: principles of social research, proposal and study design, sampling and data 
collection, operationalization and analysis through quantitative, qualitative, and mixed-methods approaches. 
Preparation for independent research in social sciences and public policy. Fulfills the methods course 
requirement for Children in Contemporary Society certificate program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Child 
Policy 241
241A. Multi-Method Approaches to Social and Policy Research. QS, R, SS Same as PUBPOL 241. 
Taught at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Child Policy 241A
242S. Child Policy Research. R, SS One course. C-L: see Child Policy 250S
243S. Children, Schools, and Society. CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Education 243S; also C-L: 
Child Policy Research, Ethics Elective
244S. School Dropout and Educational Policy. CCI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Education 310S; also 
C-L: Cultural Anthropology 251S
245. Promising Paradigms: Issues and Innovations in American Classrooms. EI, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Education 241; also C-L: Child Policy Research
246A. Marine Conservation Policy - A Practicum. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Environment 346A; also 
C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
247. American Constitutional Development and Interpretation II: Individual Rights. EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Political Science 246
248S. History of Political Nonviolence. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 238S; also C-L: Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 238S, Human Rights
249. Life Within Capitalism: A History of its Values, Measures and Struggles. CZ, EI Examination 
of how capitalism has profoundly shaped people’s ethical values, with focus on United States. Investigates 
central developments behind history of capitalism; explores key struggles that led to formation of capitalist logic 
(choices, values, goals); traces impact of capitalist goals and measures on ethical values and choices; examines 
discussions about possible future developments within capitalism. Instructor: Philipsen. One course. C-L: Study 
of Ethics 271, Economics 270, History 284, Political Science 252
250FS. Law, Ethics & Responsibility. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 212FS; also C-L: 
Science & Society 212FS
251. American Constitutional Development and Interpretation I: The Constitutional Structure. 
EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 245
253. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian 
& Middle Eastern Studies 317; also C-L: Religion 234, African & African American Studies 249, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 249, Human Rights
254. America in the World Economy: The Law, Politics, and Economics of U.S. Antitrust, 1890-
2015. R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 255; also C-L: History 252, Study of Ethics 255, Ethics 
Elective, Markets and Management Studies
256. Social Innovation. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 261
257S. Shakespeare & Financial Markets: Why This Time is Never Different. CCI, SS One course. 
C-L: see Economics 255S
258AS. Science, Ethics, and Society. CZ, EI Two courses. C-L: see Philosophy 385AS; also C-L: Religion 
282AS
259S. Women as Leaders. SS, W Explore the long history of women’s activism in the United States, and 



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 681

how that history has shaped current debates about women leaders. Explore the variety of ways that women 
exercise leadership not just in party politics and corporations, but in neighborhoods, schools, and unions among 
other places. Learn about theories of leadership, and connect theory to practice through the process of exercising 
leadership on campus through a hands-on final project. Both men and women welcome in the class. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
260S. Leadership, Policy, and Change. EI, SS Ethical and practical issues of social and organizational 
change, including conflicts about power and authority, violence, gender, race, fairness, wealth and work. How 
imagination, fictional and historical narratives, anger, friendship, and teaching skills can be useful in working 
for change. Problems of group dynamics, integrity, responsibility, and self-understanding faced by those 
supporting or opposing changes. Instructor: Stansbury. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
261SA. Whose Democracy? Participation and Public Policy in the United States. SS Overview of 
patterns in Americans’ engagement in and disengagement from civic life. Theories of why people do (and do not) 
participate. Differences across lines of gender, race, ideology, generation, and class. Role of American interest 
groups and social movements in policy change. Influence of public policies (e.g., federal tax laws, participation 
requirements, programs such as AmeriCorps) on civic and political participation. Implications for equality, 
voice, and the health of American democracy. Classroom discussion; guest speakers; short memos. Offered 
through the Duke in DC program. Instructor: Goss. One course. C-L: Political Science 241SA
263. Border Crossing: Leadership, Value Conflicts, and Public Life. CCI, EI, SS, W Preparation 
course for students who plan to conduct community-based research projects in the summer through Service 
Opportunities in Leadership, or another research service-learning opportunity. Through case studies of religious 
and political groups in the US, Europe, and Middle East with conflicting views about the role of religious faith 
in public life, explores leadership as the art of working productively with difficult value conflicts in groups, 
institutions, and social systems. Includes training in basic research methods and ethics of human subjects 
research, completion of a 20-hour service project for a community organization, and exploration of a leadership 
framework for undertaking complex problem-solving work in the public arena. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
265S. Enterprising Leadership. EI, SS The central goal of Enterprising Leadership (PPS265) is to 
provide students with analytical competence, enterprising leadership identity, and personal agency important 
to exercising leadership in organizations, in communities, and in life. The course explores the many facets of 
leadership and leadership development including the processes by which people affect change in a variety of 
roles and situations. Leadership within a framework of ethics, values, and innovative action are emphasized as 
a basis for contributing to the process of making good things happen without reliance on formal authority. This 
is not a traditional course in leadership studies or leading organizations. Instructor: Brown. One course. C-L: 
Marine Science and Conservation
267S. Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 267S; also C-L: Russian 267S, 
Sociology 267S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 267S, Study of Ethics 267S, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
268. Animals and Ethics: Welfare, Rights, Utilitarianism, and Beyond. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 270
270S. Lead the Way Durham: Civic Engagement, Social Innovation, and Community Leadership 
in the Bull City. EI, SS This course will facilitate the exercise of innovative leadership to address important 
social and civic needs in Durham. We will explore and shape democracy through grassroots work by engaging 
with issues of participation, citizenship, equity, justice, and well-being in the Durham community. Learning 
about Durham’s history and with the goal of helping create positive change, students will identify a need, 
garner the necessary resources, and develop a context specific solution to address this need for the service-
learning component of the course. Through active participation and mindful reflection, students will have the 
opportunity to shape and refine their personal models of social change. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Kaligotla. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
271S. Social Entrepreneurship in Action. EI, SS Social Entrepreneurship in Action is a leadership 
course in applied social innovation. The course provides students with knowledge, analytical competence, and 
leadership skills important to becoming a change maker. The teaching method is interactive and experiential 
and assumes that the students are highly motivated to be part of an action learning community. Instructor: 
Brown, staff. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation, Ethics Elective



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)682

272S. Overlooked Children: Topics of Equity and Access in Gifted Education. CCI, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Education 272S
273T-1. Voices in Public Policy: Spanish Tutorial. Students explore how language and culture impact 
public policy and practice. Through authentic texts, video, and case studies in Spanish, students analyze 
policy issues in the Latino/a community to develop their understanding of core issues in the field. 1/2 credit. 
Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory. Tutorials meet for 75 minutes/week. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: 4 semesters 
of equivalent of Spanish. Instructor: Staff. Half course. C-L: Spanish 271T
274S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 277S; also C-L: Global Health 277S, Russian 277S, Study of Ethics 277S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 277S, Human Rights
275. United States Environmental Policy. EI, SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Environment 212; also 
C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 213, Energy and the Environment, Marine Science 
and Conservation
278. North American Environmental History. CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 345; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 340
279S. Environment and Conflict: The Role of the Environment in Conflict and Peacebuilding. 
CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Environment 216S; also C-L: Political Science 367S, International 
Comparative Studies 229S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 229S, Islamic Studies, 
Marine Science and Conservation, Human Rights
280S. Marine Science and Conservation Leadership. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 350S; also C-L: Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
281A. Marine Policy. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 286A; also C-L: Marine Sciences, 
Marine Science and Conservation
282S. Social Engineering and Social Movements in Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 375S; also C-L: History 333S, Political Science 359S
283. Ethics in an Unjust World. CCI, CZ, EI, SS The course considers the question, “How can we fix 
poverty?” It begins by exploring the nature of poverty through a variety of descriptive metaphors (for example, 
poverty as a “trap” or a “disease”). It then considers the word “we,” and in doing so introduces several basic 
understandings of ethics (deontology, utilitarianism, virtue ethics, etc.) Finally it considers the word “fix” and 
offers three models for responding to poverty: working for, working with, and being with. Each model explores 
several examples of good practice followed by critical reflection as students engage with opportunities in 
Durham displaying each approach. Instructor: Hollowell. One course. C-L: Civic Engagement and Social Change 
283
283S. Ethics in an Unjust World. CCI, CZ, EI, SS The course considers the question, “How can we fix 
poverty?” It begins by exploring the nature of poverty through a variety of descriptive metaphors (for example, 
poverty as a “trap” or a “disease”). It then considers the word “we,” and in doing so introduces several basic 
understandings of ethics (deontology, utilitarianism, virtue ethics, etc.) Finally it considers the word “fix” and 
offers three models for responding to poverty: working for, working with, and being with. Each model explores 
several examples of good practice followed by critical reflection as students engage with opportunities in 
Durham displaying each approach. Open only to Duke Immerse students. Instructor: Hollowell. One course.
284. Denial, Faith, Reason: Sustainability and Survival. EI This course investigates both theory and 
history of the concept of sustainability, and explores its various economic and political manifestations over 
time. What are the historical roots of the sustainability debate? What aspects of life do various concepts of 
sustainability entail, and how do they inform modern ethics? What, in the end, does the history of political 
economics teach us about the possibility of sustainable development? Instructor: Philipsen. One course. C-L: 
Study of Ethics 285, Economics 285, Environment 276, History 325, Sustainability Engagement 276
285S. Comparative Urban Politics and Policymaking. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 
235S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 213S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
235S, African & African American Studies 234S



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 683

287. The Political History of Modern Architecture: From Revolution through Neoliberalism. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 284; also C-L: History 263, Political Science 263
288. International Trade. CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Economics 355; also C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
289. Public Finance. QS, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 438
290. Selected Public Policy Topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Public Policy Special Topics Away. Transfer grading only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290D. Selected Topics Public Policy. Topics vary. Discussion version of Public Policy Studies 290. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Selected Public Policy Topics. Seminar version of Public Policy Studies 290. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290S-1. Selected Topics in Public Policy. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course.
290T. Selected Topics in Public Policy. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Staff. Half 
course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291T. Special Topics Tutorial Journalism & Media Studies. Half course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and 
Media Studies 290T
293AS. Studies in the United States Culture Industries. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see Visual and 
Media Studies 279AS; also C-L: Documentary Studies 282AS
295S. Relations between Industrialized and Developing Countries. SS This is a survey course 
for students interested in learning about the major issues in international relations between industrialized 
and developing countries. We will move rapidly through topics such as foreign aid, trade, climate change, 
peacekeeping, colonial history/legacy, disease, NGOs, migration, fragile states, etc. The objective is for 
all students to gain a sense of the complexity of issues connecting industrialized and developing states, to 
understand links across issue areas, to introduce students to scholarship and policy on these issues, and 
to provide a chance for students to critically engage these issues. Assessment includes writing, tests, and 
presentations. Instructor: Bermeo. One course. C-L: Political Science 251S
298. Authentic Leadership in Private, Public, and Not-for-Profit Organizations. EI, SS Exploration 
of the attributes of leadership, why some leaders fail and other succeed; identification of the core values each 
student possesses which will bring success to organizations throughout their lives. Case study format, class 
participation is critical to success. Each student will develop a personal perspective on leadership, learn from 
examples of success and failure, look at the ethical challenges facing leaders today, learn the tools leaders use to 
support successful cultures, enhance self-awareness, and prepare to become successful leaders. Strong emphasis 
on writing skills, how to communicate briefly and effectively in written memos. Students will also work in teams. 
Instructor: Eacho. One course.
301. Political Analysis for Public Policy-Making. SS, W Analysis of the political and organizational 
processes which influence the formulation and implementation of public policy. Alternative models. 
Prerequisite: Public Policy 155D. Instructor: Carnes, Jentleson, Napoli, Rose, or Krishna. One course. C-L: 
Political Science 310
302D. Policy Choice as Value Conflict. EI, SS Theoretical and practical problems in decision making 
in relation to conflicts of value and of interest. The manifestation of norms deriving from professional ethics, 
ideology, law, and other sources in such policy issues as welfare, environmental management, and national 
defense. Prerequisites: Public Policy Studies 155D. Instructor: Miles, Pearson, Peck, or Philipsen. One course. 
C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
303D. Microeconomic Policy Tools. SS Development and application of analytical economic tools in a 
policy environment. Emphasis on application of economic methods in a variety of policy settings and developing 
testable hypotheses that might be used to guide economic policy. Analytical topics include willingness to pay, 
derived demand, multi-market interactions, comparative advantage, investment analysis, and decision making 
under uncertainty. Applications include tax analysis, including incidence, effective protection, shadow pricing, 



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)684

introduction to government expenditures, labor market policy, examples of regulation and pricing externalities. 
Instructor: Sanders, Darity, Pfaff, Mohanan, Krupp, M. Johnson, Meeks, or staff. One course.
304. Economics of the Public Sector. SS Applies tools of intermediate micro economics to the public 
sector. Develops economic justifications for government intervention into the economy and examines and 
evaluates various government policies and programs including regulation of externalities, welfare programs, 
social security and other social insurance programs. Provides a solid foundation for applied benefit cost 
analysis. Analyzes tax policy and other forms of government financing, both at national and subnational levels. 
Prerequisites: Public Policy Studies 303D or Economics 201D. Instructor: Ananat, Sexton, Bhattacharya, Pfaff, 
Jeuland, or staff. One course. C-L: Economics 338
306. Anthropology of Money. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 350; also C-L: 
Economics 309, International Comparative Studies 328, African & African American Studies 211
310. Market Power and Public Policy. QS, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 465
311S. Business and Human Rights Advocacy Lab. EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 301S; 
also C-L: Political Science 341S, International Comparative Studies 317S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 301S, Markets and Management Studies, Human Rights
312A. The Arts in New York: A Thematic Approach. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see English 312A; also 
C-L: Theater Studies 213A, Visual and Media Studies 259A
313D. Religion, Restrictions, and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Religion 301D; also C-L: 
Jewish Studies 301D, Political Science 303D, Study of Ethics 303D, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 301D
314. Managing the Oceans to Solve Global Problems. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Environment 314; also 
C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
315. Gender and the Law. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 401; 
also C-L: Literature 430, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 401
317S. Illiberal Nondemocracies: Focus on Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Slavic and Eurasian Studies 388S; also C-L: History 331S, International Comparative Studies 346S, Political 
Science 301S
318S. Non-Profit Cultural Institutions. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 310S; also C-L: 
Economics 247S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 310S, Visual and Media Studies 329S, Dance 208S
324. Global Health Policy: Transforming Evidence into Action. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Global Health 306
326S. Racial Justice in the 20th Century US and South Africa. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 346S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 351S, History 396S, 
Political Science 336S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 349S, Human Rights
327S. Apartheid South Africa and the Struggles for Democracy. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: 
see African & African American Studies 316S; also C-L: History 386S, Political Science 337S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 316S, Human Rights
330. Global Health Ethics: Policy Choice as Value Conflict. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 
210; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 397, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 
330, Global Health, Human Rights
331. Health Economics. EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Economics 334
333. War and Public Health in Africa. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 312; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 312, Global Health 312, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 312, Human Rights
335. Comparative Health Care Systems. CCI, EI, SS The interaction of historical, political, economic, 
cultural, and legal/ethical factors in how health care systems in high income [OECD] nations are organized and 
financed and to what end in terms of quality and health outcomes. Major focus on United States, England, and 
Canada, with select examples from other high income nations including Switzerland, the Netherlands, Japan 
and Singapore. Instructor: Taylor. One course. C-L: Sociology 271, Political Science 355



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 685

337SA. Marketing Québec: Policy, Marketing, and Identity. CCI, FL, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
French 328SA; also C-L: Markets and Management Studies
338S. Race, Class and the Rise of the American Charter School. CCI, EI, SS, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 338S
339A. Religion, Security and Global Citizenship in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 326A; also C-L: Religion 371A, International Comparative Studies 362A, 
Political Science 395A
340S. De/Re/Segregation in Education: A Case of Back to the Future?. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: 
see Education 303S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 303S, Human Rights
340T. Memory Bandits: Human Rights, Duke’s History and a Plan to Expand History-Telling. 
ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 347T; also C-L: History 340T, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 346T, Human Rights
342. History of Modern America: The United States from 1930 to present. CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see History 343; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 343, Human Rights
343. Journalism in the Age of Data. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
375
344. History of U.S. Social Movements. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 344; also C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 344, Human Rights
345. Genocide and Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see History 272; also C-L: Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 272, Human Rights
346S. Family Rights/Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 389S; also C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 389S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South, Human 
Rights
347S. The Connection between Human Rights, Memory and How Societies Create Memorials. 
ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 346S; also C-L: History 350S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 346S, Human Rights
348. Science and Policy of Obesity. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Science & Society 248
349. Global Environmental Politics. SS One course. C-L: see Environment 348; also C-L: Political Science 
348
350S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 347S; also C-L: Education 347S, History 334S, Sociology 324S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 347S, Human Rights
351A. The Economic and Political History of the European Union. CCI, CZ, FL, SS One course. C-L: 
see French 351A; also C-L: Political Science 325A, History 331A, Economics 330A
352. U.S-Russia Relations: 1991-2016. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 415; also C-L: Political 
Science 415
353S. U.S. Policy in the Middle East. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 352S
354. Politics in the Developing World. CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 354; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies, Islamic Studies
355A. Political Economy of Immigration. CCI, SS Two courses. C-L: see Political Science 294A; also C-L: 
Economics 434A, Sociology 294A
356A. Globalization and Deglobalization. FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 350A; also C-L: Political 
Science 320A, Economics 320A, International Comparative Studies 363A
357S. Watchdog Reporting in Politics. EI, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
374S; also C-L: Political Science 374S, Study of Ethics 374S
358S. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Cultural Anthropology 360S; also C-L: Literature 361S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 360S, Sociology 360S, 



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)686

International Comparative Studies 369S
359. Violent Jihad in the Twentieth Century - A Global History. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 
359; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 359, Political Science 382, International Comparative Studies 361
360S. Post-1945 America. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see History 395S
361S. Algorithms, Journalism and the Public Interest. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies 361S
363S. Legal Issues for the Performing Arts. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 311S; also C-L: 
Economics 223S, Dance 379S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 311S
364S. Art of the Interview. R, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 364S; also C-L: 
Documentary Studies 364S
365S. Video Journalism. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 365S; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 305S, Documentary Studies 367S, Information Science + Studies, Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies
366S. Magazine Journalism. SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 366S; also 
C-L: Documentary Studies 356S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
367S. News Writing and Reporting. R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
367S; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
369S. The Intersection of Politics, Policy, and Media. SS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and 
Media Studies 386S
371. News as a Moral Battleground. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 371; also C-L: Study of Ethics 259, Documentary Studies 371, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 371, Human Rights, Documentary Studies
372. Information, Technology, Ethics and Policy. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism 
and Media Studies 372; also C-L: Political Science 388, Information Science + Studies, Policy Journalism and 
Media, Ethics Elective
373. Intellectual Property: Law, Policy, and Practice. EI, SS, STS Survey and analysis of American 
intellectual property law and policy. Examines the impact of intangible assets--copyrights, trademarks, patents, 
and related rights and interests--on artistic expression, communication, and innovation. Emphasis on media-
oriented issues including film, television, music, computer programs, and digital content, with special focus 
on the tension between the impulse to protect property interests and the need for an expansive public domain. 
Extensive readings in both case law and policy commentary. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 373, Markets and Management Studies, Policy Journalism and Media
374. Contemporary Documentary Film: Filmmakers and the Full Frame Documentary Film 
Festival. ALP, CCI, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 264; also C-L: Documentary Studies 
270, Political Science 276, Arts & Sciences IDEAS themes and University Course 206
375S. Public Policy Video. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 271S; also C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 377S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 271S, Human Rights
376D. Foreign Policy of the United States. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Political Science 365D
377S. Medicine and the Vision of Documentary Photography. ALP One course. C-L: see Documentary 
Studies 206S; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 204S, Visual Arts 204S
379S. The First Amendment in the Digital Age. EI, SS Analysis of the role of the First Amendment in 
content-oriented media and communications. Examination of the relationship between American intellectual 
property regimes and the Bill of Rights, proscription of “any law...abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
press....” Critical readings of commentary and some case law, with extensive classroom discussion in a small 
seminar format. Substantive topics include policy-based perspectives on digital encryption and performance, 
open source software, rights clearance issues, infringement theory in derivative works, dilution theory, and 
jurisdiction in cyberspace. Prerequisite Public Policy Studies 373S or PJMS 373S. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Policy Journalism and Media



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 687

380S. Politics of Food: Land, Labor, Health, and Economics. ALP, CCI, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 341S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 238S, International Comparative Studies 342S, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 342S, Human Rights
382S. Refugee Policy and Practice (DukeImmerse). CCI, EI, QS, SS One course. C-L: see Study of 
Ethics 388S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 355S, Political Science 357S
383S. Politics of Sexuality. CCI, CZ, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 386S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 386S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 386S, 
History 346S
386SA. Politics and Culture Between Europe and the Middle East. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 381SA; also C-L: History 378SA, International Comparative Studies 225SA
387S. Documenting Black Experiences. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 350S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 225S, Visual and Media Studies 213S, Cultural Anthropology 262S, 
International Comparative Studies 368S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 350S, Human 
Rights
388S. Human Rights and Documentary: Aesthetics, Ethics, History. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Documentary Studies 366S; also C-L: History 398S, Visual Arts 366S, Visual and Media Studies 368S, Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 366S, Human Rights
389S. Small Town USA: Local Collaborations. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 
230S; also C-L: Visual Arts 232S, Visual and Media Studies 224S, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Public Policy 
Studies. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
391. Independent Study. Supervised reading in a field of special interest under the sponsorship of a faculty 
member. Requires a substantive paper containing significant analysis and interpretation. Consent of instructor 
and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper containing significant analysis and 
interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395S. Children and the Experience of Illness. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 202S; 
also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 211S, Child Policy Research
397S. Advanced Reporting. W One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 397S
399A. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 399A; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
399A, International Comparative Studies 399A
401S. Capstone Course for Certificate in Civic Engagement and Social Change: Lives of Civic 
Engagement. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Education 401S; also C-L: Political Science 401S, Study of Ethics 
401S, Ethics Elective
406S. South African Life Histories. CCI, CZ, R, W One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 406S; also C-L: History 450S, Political Science 406S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 406S, Cultural Anthropology 406S
409. Leadership in International Relations. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 410
410. Policy Journalism and Media Studies Capstone Course. R, SS One course. C-L: see Policy 
Journalism and Media Studies 410
411S. Historicizing Whiteness. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Examines origins, historical development, and 
consequences of white racial identity, from the 17th century to the present, beginning with the emergence of 
white racial grammar among trafficked white servants and so-called “white slaves” to the creation of racialized 
rights and privileges for white people in Great Britain and the United States in the 19th, 20th, and 21st centuries. 
Instructor: Peck. One course. C-L: History 411S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 411S, 
Human Rights



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)688

414S. Research in Human Rights. CCI, EI, R, SS Focuses on human rights issues in North Carolina, the 
United States, and around the world. General human rights literature along with several detailed case studies 
will prepare students to undertake an original piece of research on a topic of their choice. Offered through the 
DukeImmerse Program. Director of Undergraduate Studies consent required. Instructor: Kirk. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 414S, History 414S
415. Servant Leadership in a Democracy. EI, R, SS, W Capstone course for students completing 
community-based research (CBR) projects through Service Opportunities in Leadership Program. Involves 
critical reflection on summer projects, exploration of leadership, politics, and policy design concepts. 
Exploration, drawing upon students’ experiences, questions, and insights as a starting point, of how lives of 
commitment to the common good are formed and sustained. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Blount. 
One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media
417S. Critical Interventions in Middle East Studies and Policy. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 479S; also C-L: History 417S, International Comparative Studies 408S, 
Literature 417S, International Comparative Studies
420S. Multidisciplinary Approaches to Contemporary Children’s Issues. R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Child Policy 495S
425. Intellectual Property and Innovation: Law, Policy & Entrepreneurship. EI, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Markets and Management Studies 425; also C-L: Sociology 425, Economics 295, Information 
Science + Studies 425
445A. Climate Change in the Marine Environment. EI, NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 
445A; also C-L: Biology 445A, Marine Sciences, Marine Science and Conservation
450AS. Glasgow Seminar in Public Policy. CCI, R, SS Analysis of the British political system and 
important public policy problems in Britain including: privatization, Britain and the European community, 
and economic and social policy. (Taught in Scotland.) Prerequisite: Public Policy Studies 155D, two of the core 
courses (Public Policy Studies 301, 302, 303D or equivalent, or Statistical Science 101), and consent of director 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
473S. Building a Sustainable Tomorrow. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Sustainability Engagement 498S
490S. Capstone Seminars in Special Topics in Public Policy. Selected topics for courses offering 
capstone experiences or advanced research. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493A. Politics and Policy Practicum for Duke in DC. R, SS In this course, students develop policy 
expertise and professional skills relating to their Washington internship. In their final paper, students analyze 
a policy issue they have encountered in their internship and develop and evaluate alternative approaches to the 
issues. The course also provides students with skills that enhance their internship experience and that prepare 
them for future research and policy work. The skill-building components may include: analyzing sources of 
information, interviewing for research and for policy analysis, doing sensitivity analysis, providing constructive 
criticism, and briefing expert and non-expert audiences. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 
494A
494. Honors Project: Research Independent Study. R Individual research in field of special interest 
under supervision of a faculty member leading to completion of an honors thesis in Public Policy Studies. First 
semester requires substantive paper that outlines thesis. Second semester results in paper containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of the topic. Open only to students seeking honors via research independent study 
route. Consent of instructor and honors project director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Honors Seminar. R, SS, W Special research topics. Consent of the honors seminar instructor and 
director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
496S. Honors Seminar. R, SS, W Continuation of Public Policy Studies 495S. Consent of the honors 
seminar instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Prerequisite: Public Policy Studies 495S. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
497S. Senior Seminar Special Topics. For special topics courses that are targeted toward upper-level 
students and capstone experiences. Instructor: Staff. One course.
501S. American Grand Strategy. CZ, R, SS, W C-L: see Political Science 562S; also C-L: History 567S



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 689

502S. Contemporary United States Foreign Policy. EI, R, SS Focus on challenges and opportunities for 
American foreign policy in this global age including the impact of interests, ideals and values. Draws on both 
the scholarly literature and policy analyses. Addresses big picture questions about America’s role in the world 
as well as major current foreign policy issues that raise considerations of power, security, prosperity and ethics. 
Open to undergraduates with permission of instructor and priority to Public Policy Studies and Political Science 
majors, and to graduate students. Instructor: Jentleson. C-L: Political Science 670S
503S. United States Policy in the Middle East. CCI, SS From World War II to the present with a focus on 
current policy options. Instructor: Kuniholm. C-L: History 509S, International Comparative Studies
504. Counterterrorism Law and Policy. EI, R, SS This course explores the novel legal and policy 
issues resulting from the United States’ response to 9/11 attacks and the threat posed by modern terrorist 
organizations. Topics include preventative/preventive war; detention, interrogation, and prosecution of 
suspect terrorists; domestic surveillance; and government secrecy and public access to information. Instructor: 
Schanzer. C-L: Political Science 543
505S. National Security Decision Making. EI, SS Course explores the delicate art of national security 
decision-making through deeper understanding of national security apparatus, analysis of elements of national 
power (examination of historical examples of application), and application of analysis to assess merits of various 
approaches to national security decision-making. Instructor: Nichols.
506. Politics of United States Foreign Policy. EI, R, SS Focus on politics of U.S. foreign policy: which 
institutions and actors within the American political system play what roles and have how much influence in 
making U.S. foreign policy. Fundamental questions about nature and practice of democracy as manifested 
in politics and policy processes in making US foreign policy. Scope is both historical and contemporary. 
Approach combines theory and policy analysis. Complements Pub Pol 502S, Contemporary U.S. Foreign Policy, 
which focuses more on foreign policy strategy. Instructor: Jentleson. C-L: Political Science 547, International 
Comparative Studies 506
507S. Intelligence for National Security. EI, SS Addresses complex US intelligence enterprise that has 
been established to support our national security priorities. First, students review and discuss current structure 
of national intelligence apparatus. Case studies are used to evaluate effectiveness and design of intelligence 
agencies and their accompanying capabilities. Finally, students conduct independent research on select 
intelligence agencies and organizations. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Nichols.
508. Culture and Explosion: How Russian Culture Changed the World. ALP, CCI, CZ, STS C-L: see 
Russian 533; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 533
510S. Science and the Media: Narrative Writing about Science, Health and Policy. STS, W C-L: see 
Bioethics and Science Policy 510S; also C-L: Policy Journalism and Media Studies 510S, Documentary Studies
511. Social Innovation Practicum. C-L: see Innovation and Entrepreneurship 510
513S. International Democratization. EI, R, SS Focus on critical analysis of international efforts to 
improve governance, build democracy and increase respect for human rights through a series of methods or 
tools: international law, sanctions, aid, conditionality, and a vast array of activities broadly labeled democracy 
promotion, including election assistance and civil society development. Class requires a high level of discussion 
and preparation for each meeting. Emphasis on student application of reading material to a particular country. 
Instructor: Kelley. C-L: Political Science 647S
515S. Assisting Development. R, SS, W Examines evolution of international development theory and 
practice since early 1950s. Investigates how different solutions advanced to deal with poverty have fared. 
Different streams of academic and policy literature, including economics, political science, and sociology, are 
consulted with a view to understanding what could have been done in the past and what should be done at the 
present time. Examines alternative formulations weekly in seminar format. Individual research papers (60% 
of grade) which analyze past and present development practices in a country of their choice, or examine trends 
within a particular sector (e.g., agriculture, population, gender relations, the environment). Instructor: Krishna. 
C-L: Political Science 546S, International Comparative Studies 514S
519. International Development and Technology: The Benefits and Risks of Promoting 
Digitalization. C-L: see Science & Society 519



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)690

524S. Social Determinants of Health Disparities. CCI, EI, SS This course utilizes a Social Determinants 
of Health (SDH) perspective to explore health differences. The SDH are life enhancing resources and life 
compromising risks the differential distribution of which determines inter-population differences in health. 
The SDH perspective suggests that a range of policy decisions are systematically associated with health. 
Consequently, virtually all policy is health policy. The objective of this course is to have students critically 
examine the various processes influencing health across diverse population groups. We will examine identity 
construction, stratification, marginalization, inequality and the physical embodiment of lived social experience. 
Instructor: Pearson.
525S. Poverty Policy After Welfare Reform. EI, SS An examination of causes and consequences of 
poverty in the United States, reviewing major social policies used to combat poverty. Examines evidence on 
the effects of the 1996 welfare reform and studies the piecemeal anti-poverty programs that have risen in 
place of traditional welfare. Considers tradeoffs and unintended consequences present in America’s safety net. 
Instructor: Gassman-Pines.
526S. Race and American Politics. CCI, SS C-L: see Political Science 525S; also C-L: African & African 
American Studies 544S
527S. Poverty, Inequality, and Public Policy in the U S. SS, W Examines causes and consequences of 
poverty and inequality in the United States; reviews major social policies used to combat poverty’s ill effects. 
Acquaint students with definition and extent of poverty and inequality, examine poverty’s “causes”, including 
family structure and low wage employment, discuss effects of poverty on family and child well-being, and 
analyze the primary poverty policies employed by the United States, including Temporary Aid to Needy 
Families, Food Stamps, Medicaid, and WIC. Lecture and class discussion, drawing on material from a variety of 
disciplines. Instructor: Gibson-Davis.
528. History of Poverty in the United States. CCI, CZ, SS C-L: see Study of Ethics 561; also C-L: History 
546, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 561, Human Rights
529S. Race and Ethnicity. CCI, EI, SS Explores in depth policies of redress for intergroup disparities or 
inequality across countries. Examination of policies that attempt to systematically correct differences across 
racial/ethnic groups in income, wealth, health, rates of incarceration, political participation, and educational 
attainment, e.g. affirmative action, land redistribution, parental school choice, and income redistribution 
measures in a number of countries including India, the United States, Brazil, Malaysia, Chile, and South Africa. 
Address question of why intergroup differences in outcomes should be viewed as a social problem. Instructor: 
Darity. C-L: African & African American Studies 551S, International Comparative Studies 529S
530S. Gender, Identity, and Public Policy. R, SS The role of women and women’s organizations as 
advocates for, and targets of, public policymaking. The grounding of women’s collective action claims in 
understandings of women’s “sameness as” and “difference from” men, and the implications of those frames for 
women’s citizenship. Gender differences in individual civic engagement and in the styles and priorities of male 
and female elected officials. The historic evolution of women’s organizational engagement in gender-specific 
and general-purpose public policies. The impact of globalization on women. The oppression and emancipation 
of women in traditional societies. The legitimacy crises facing maternal, second wave, and third wave feminism. 
Instructor: Goss. C-L: Political Science 521S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 515S
531S. Philanthropy: The Power of Money. EI, R, SS Seminar course with applied project designed to 
deepen understanding of role of private wealth in shaping public policy. Provides overview of philanthropy 
in America, emphasizing new generation of billionaires. Engages philosophical debates over obligations and 
opportunities of wealth in an age of income inequality and governance challenges. Discusses laws structuring 
politically oriented giving. Explores strategies donors use to pursue their vision of the public good, including 
new work at intersection of business, social sector. Evaluates why some strategies succeed while others fail. Case 
studies may include education reform, community development, clean energy, etc. Instructor: Goss.
542S. Schooling and Social Stratification. CCI, SS This course will examine educational policies in a 
comparative, cross-national fashion with a focus on the implications for the construction of social hierarchy 
and inequality. Instructor: Darity. C-L: African & African American Studies 549S, Education 542S, Child Policy 
Research
544S. Schools and Social Policy. R, SS Overview and selected current policy issues related to K-12 



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 691

education. Includes small-group research projects that require data analysis, literature searches, and interviews 
with education policy makers. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Child Policy Research
555S. The Politics of Market Competition in a Global Economy. R, SS C-L: see Political Science 555S; 
also C-L: Study of Ethics 555S, Markets and Management Studies
556S. The Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, SS Examines key episodes and issues in the international history of 
the Cold War. Seminar readings will be drawn from historical literature and primary sources. Topics will extend 
beyond the traditional focus on US-Soviet rivalry and examine the conflict’s impact on societies around the 
world, especially in newly independent states. Evaluation will be based on seminar participation and written 
assignment focused on primary source usage. Students will think about not only history, but also how the Cold 
War’s effects are still being felt today. Instructor: Miles. C-L: Political Science 542S, History 556S
558S. Understanding Ethical Crisis in Organizations. EI, R, SS C-L: see Study of Ethics 562S; also C-L: 
Political Science 502S, Sociology 542S
559S. Philanthropy, Voluntarism, and Not-for-Profit Management. EI, SS An examination of the role 
and functioning of the not-for-profit sector in relation to both the public sector and the private for-profit sector 
in dealing with significant social problems. Also taught as Law 585. Instructor: Fleishman.
560S. Philanthropy: the Theory of Practice and the Practice of Theory. R, SS Role of grantmaking 
foundations as engines of social, economic, and political change. Normative implications for democracy of elites 
using wealth to influence society. Theories of strategic vs. expressive philanthropy. Debate over time-limited vs. 
perpetual foundations. Cases of philanthropy’s impact in realms such as education, public television, and AIDS 
research. New philanthropic ventures that hybridize for-profit and non-profit approaches. Consulting project to 
guide newly wealthy individuals in philanthropic strategy. Instructor: Goss.
561. 9/11: Causes, Response & Strategy. EI, SS, W Examination of the origin and ideology of al-Qaeda 
and affiliated organizations, the events that led to the 9/11 attacks, and the public policy response in terms of use 
of force, preventive intelligence and law enforcement policies, and homeland security. Comparative examination 
of the efficacy and ethics of alternative counterterrorism policies. Instructor: Schanzer. C-L: Political Science 
544, International Comparative Studies 561
562S. Monuments and Memory: Public Policy and Remembrance of Racial Histories. ALP, CCI, 
EI, SS Processes of memorialization of various dimensions of racial pasts, via statuaries, naming of parks 
and buildings, films (both documentary and fiction), novels, historical works. In depth treatment of political 
and economic basis for determining what events or persons are remembered and how they are remembered. 
Interdisciplinary course encompassing literary studies, memory studies, history, political science, anthropology, 
and economics. Instructor: Darity. C-L: African & African American Studies 541S
563S. Making Social Policy. R, SS Examines the policymaking process, the role of different sectors in 
policymaking, policymakers’ use of research and communicating with policymakers. Focus on social policy. 
Includes experiential and written work as well as visits from policymakers and to policymaking “events.” 
Instructor: Staff. C-L: Child Policy 634S, Sociology 634S, Child Policy Research
564. Democracy Lab. SS The Democracy Lab involves teams of students working on finding innovative 
approaches to a variety of political issues. The course will largely consist of client-based projects in which the 
teams, coached by the professor, that produce a substantial report or the equivalent that contributes to the 
health of political processes. Examples of topics may include, but not be limited to: reforming redistricting 
processes, designing voter rules, social media and politics, student voting at Duke, money in politics, and 
bridging societal divides. Instructor: Staff.
574. Economic Evaluation of Sustainable Development. EI, SS Examines how one could rationally 
defend a choice of ‘sustainable development’ policy. Applies cost-benefit thinking in environment-natural-
resources and development contexts. Presents microeconomic concepts emphasizing logic and principles more 
than mechanics. Intertemporal equity is a focus and equity-efficiency tradeoffs are a theme. Microeconomics 
prerequisite not required. Instructor: Pfaff. C-L: Environment 572
575D. Resource and Environmental Economics and Policy. C-L: see Environment 520D; also C-L: 
Economics 530D
575L. Resource and Environmental Economics. C-L: see Environment 520L; also C-L: Economics 530L



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)692

576. Resource & Environmental Economics I. SS C-L: see Environment 520; also C-L: Economics 530, 
Energy 520, Marine Science and Conservation
577. Environmental Politics. SS C-L: see Environment 577; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 
577, Energy and the Environment
578. Land Use Principles and Policy. SS C-L: see Environment 550
579S. Collective Action, Environment, and Development. SS Examines the conditions under which 
collective or participatory decisions may raise welfare in defined ways. Presents the growing empirical evidence 
for an environment and development setting including common property issues (tragedy of the commons 
and competing models). Identifies what evidence exists for sharing norms on a background of self-interested 
strategies. Definitions of and reactions to equity and/or its absence are a focus. Providing scientific information 
for policy is another. Experimental and behavioral economics are frequently applied. Instructor: Pfaff. C-L: 
Environment 579S
580S. Water Cooperation and Conflict. R, SS, STS Focuses on potential for transboundary water 
resources-related conflict and cooperation. Discusses water scarcity concepts, natural resource conflict theory, 
hydro politics, hydro hegemony, water security, water markets and institutions, game theory, and international 
water law. Other topics include the economics of water and health. Case studies complement the broader course 
outlook. Instructor: Jeuland. C-L: Global Health 533S, Environment 543S, International Comparative Studies 
580S
581S. International Environmental Regimes. EI, SS, STS C-L: see Political Science 545S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 521S
582. Global Environmental Health: Economics and Policy. SS, STS Social science perspective on 
global environmental health. Students will learn to identify primary environmental causes of high burden 
diseases such as malaria, diarrhea, and respiratory infections; describe how to measure socio-economic impacts 
of global environmental health diseases; discuss key policies to control global environmental health problems 
based on private prevention and therapeutic behaviors; and propose frameworks to empirically monitor and 
evaluate global environmental health policies. A sub-module will focus on climate change and water-borne 
diseases. Prerequisites: Introductory course in statistics. Instructor: Pattanayak. C-L: Environment 538, Global 
Health 538
583S. Energy and U.S. National Security. CCI, EI, SS, W Examines link between reliable, affordable, 
and sustainable sources of energy and U.S. national security. Includes ethical considerations related to energy 
resources and wealth distribution, analysis through case study of top foreign oil suppliers to U.S., as well as 
newer “unconventional” sources of energy such as shale gas and renewables. Extensive use of guest experts 
from U.S., local and foreign governments as well as industry. Specific skills include thinking like a U.S. 
diplomat (cross-cultural perspective), writing concise policy memos, and delivering a compelling, succinct oral 
presentation. Final project will require policy recommendation on an assigned energy security topic. Instructor: 
Kelly. C-L: Political Science 663S, Environment 583S, Energy and the Environment
584. Resource & Environmental Economics II. SS Variable credit. C-L: see Environment 521; also C-L: 
Economics 531
585. Climate Change Economics and Policy. C-L: see Environment 640
590. Advanced Topics in Public Policy. Selected topics. Instructor: Staff.
590S. Advanced Topics in Public Policy. Selected topics. Seminar version of Public Policy Studies 590. 
Instructor: Staff.
595S. Regulation of Vice and Substance Abuse. R, SS, W The traditional vices of drinking, smoking, 
gambling, and the recreational use of drugs. Evaluation of government policy on these activities. The intellectual 
framework for evaluation drawn from economics, although readings refer to law, psychology, philosophy, and 
statistics. Instructor: Cook.
596. Evaluation of Public Expenditures. SS Basic development of cost benefit analysis from alternative 
points of view, for example, equity debt, and economy as a whole. Techniques include: construction of cash 
flows, alternative investment rules, inflation adjustments, optimal timing and duration of projects, private 
and social pricing. Adjustments for economic distortions, foreign exchange adjustments, risk and income 



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 693

distribution examined in the context of present value rules. Examples and cases from both developed and 
developing countries. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Economics 521, Environment 532
596D. Evaluation of Public Expenditures. SS Basic development of cost benefit analysis from alternative 
points of view, for example, equity debt, and economy as a whole. Techniques include: construction of cash 
flows, alternative investment rules, inflation adjustments, optimal timing and duration of projects, private 
and social pricing. Adjustments for economic distortions, foreign exchange adjustments, risk and income 
distribution examined in the context of present value rules. Examples and cases from both developed and 
developing countries. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Economics 521D, Environment 532D
597S. Seminar in Applied Project Evaluation. R, SS Initiate, develop, and perform a project evaluation. 
Range of topics include measuring the social cost of deforestation, the B1 Bomber, a child nutrition program, the 
local arts program. Prerequisite: Economics 285 or Public Policy Studies 596. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Economics 
522S
598. Economic Growth and Development Policy. SS, STS, W Basic principles and policy issues in the 
study of economic growth and development. The roles of physical, natural and human capital, technological 
innovation, productivity improvements, history and institutions in explaining patters and causes of variations 
in growth and developmental performance of countries. Effects on growth, development, wellbeing and poverty 
levels of many current policy issues including HIV/AIDS, financial crises, macro-stability, foreign aid and 
investment, debt burdens and forgiveness, governance and corruption. Instructor: Fernholz. C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 598
601S. Urban Policy. QS, R, SS, W Overview of basic political, sociological, and economic models of 
urbanization coupled with application of these models to modern urban problems, including concentrated 
poverty, traffic congestion and mass transit, crime, land use and environmental quality, housing affordability, 
and fiscal crises. Special emphasis on historical evolution of cities. Students write a major project focusing on 
the problems facing one American city, and propose solutions to those problems. Instructor: Staff.
602S. Law, Economics, and Organizations. SS Overview of field of law and economics. Economics of 
information, contract theory, economic analysis of law, and New Institutional Economics. Consequences of 
failure of law and institutions; alternative mechanisms to sustain markets and transactions. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Economics 502S
603S. Microeconomics of International Development Policy. SS Microeconomic foundations of 
international development policy using tools of microeconomics to study behavior of individuals, households, 
and firms in developing countries. Topics may include household and intrahousehold modeling; market 
participation; agrarian contracts; credit and microfinance; nutrition and health; poverty traps; etc. Public Policy 
Studies 303D prerequisite or instructor approval. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Economics 503S
604. Using Data to Analyze and Evaluate Public Policy. QS, SS This course reviews the basic 
methods of inferring the causal impact of public policy initiatives. Topics include randomized controlled trials, 
instrumental variable analysis, regression discontinuity designs, difference-in-difference “natural experiments,” 
and propensity score/nearest neighbor matching methods. Assignments include analysis using Stata software; 
final project entails proposing a quantitative study focused on causal inference. Either Statistical Science 101 or 
Public Policy 812 required; further coursework in multiple regression preferred. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Ananat.
605. International Trade and Policy. SS Focus on economics of trade and trade policy. Includes theoretical 
models explaining patterns of trade, economic gains from trade, and distribution effects (winner and losers), 
as well as the economic effects of trade barriers, major agencies and institutions affecting trade, preferential 
trading arrangements, outsourcing and offshoring, multinationals, and labor and environmental issues. (No 
finance.) Prerequisite: Public Policy Studies 303D or Economics 201D. Instructor: Krupp. C-L: Economics 505
606. Macroeconomic Policy and International Finance. SS Survey of macroeconomic theory and 
analysis of policies designed to reduce unemployment, stimulate economic growth, and stabilize prices. 
Conventional monetary and fiscal instruments, employment policies, and new policies designed to combat 
inflation. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Economics 506
607. Cost-Benefit Analysis for Health and Environmental Policy. R, SS C-L: see Global Health 531; 
also C-L: Environment 563



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)694

608. Economics of the Family. QS, SS Examines ways extended families function as economic institution. 
Primarily empirical, but also draws on relevant microeconomic theory. No formal prerequisites, but students 
should have experience with intermediate microeconomics and econometrics/statistics. Instructor: Staff. C-L: 
Child Policy Research
609S. The Regulatory Process. R, SS, STS Study of theories in economics, political science, and law to 
examine the structure, conduct, and performance of U.S. regulatory agencies. Emphasis on why decisions are 
delegated to agencies, the degree to which regulators behave strategically, and the impact of regulatory actions 
on society. Focus on political and economic roots of scientific and technological debates in regulatory policy. 
Required research paper on origins and effectiveness of a particular regulation. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Political 
Science 617S
610. Analysis for Strategic Design of Policy and Regulation. QS, SS Applies tools from welfare 
economics, information economics, and mechanism design in order to analyze public policy problems in the 
context of asymmetric information and strategic behavior. Applications include: financial regulation, private 
and social insurance, corruption and accountability, provision of public goods, and others. Requires previous 
exposure to intermediate microeconomics (including basic game theory), and reasonable comfort with the 
mathematics of constrained optimization. Instructor: Staff.
613S. Technology Policy for the New Administration: Antirust, Speech and Other Emerging 
Issues. SS, STS A seminar that will explore the technology policy agenda for the administration that will 
begin in January 2021. The course will examine how the new administration should consider policy design 
for technology, and will evaluate the potential impact of various policy proposals in consideration. Topics 
will include antitrust policy, harmful content, and free expression. Additional topics may include privacy, 
cybersecurity, law enforcement and national security, and artificial intelligence. The focus of the course may 
shift based on current events. Instructor: Perault. C-L: Science & Society 613S
633. Topics in Population, Health, and Policy. SS, STS Substantive findings and policies/policy 
debates around selected topics in the field of population and health in industrialized and developing societies. 
Demographic models used to examine selected current population and health topics through framing, 
defining and evaluating key concepts. Topics include: end of population growth; relations between population, 
development and environment; health of populations; population aging; potentials for mortality increases; HIV/
AIDS epidemic and resurgence of infectious diseases. Readings from disciplines of demography, sociology and 
public health. Topics Course. Instructor: Merli. C-L: Sociology 534, Global Health 550
634. Ethics and Policy in Genomics. EI, R, SS C-L: see Science & Society 612; also C-L: Computational 
Biology and Bioinformatics 612
635. The Politics of Health Care. EI, SS The history, status, and future of health care policy. Grounded in 
political theories such as distributive justice, altruism, and contractarianism. Focus on policy formation. Case 
discussions of American reform controversies in light of international experience. Instructor: Conover. C-L: 
Political Science 518
636. Global Health and Health Systems in Africa. SS C-L: see Global Health 671
637. Health Policy Analysis. R, SS, W Group analysis of a current health-policy problem. Project involves 
background research, data acquisition, analysis, writing, and presentation of a substantial policy report. 
Designed for candidates seeking the undergraduate certificate in health policy. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Taylor.
638. Global Health Ethics: Interdisciplinary Perspectives. EI, SS C-L: see Global Health 540
639S. Public Health Research Methods and Issues. CCI, R, SS Focus on prevention of diseases and 
health problems; funding, policy, and management decision making. Overview of public health interventions 
and outcomes in United States, Europe, and less industrialized nations. Emphasis on understanding the social 
construction of race and ethnicity and the impact of socioeconomic variables such as race, ethnicity, gender, 
income and education on health. Public health perspective applied to such topics as: HIV/AIDS; teen pregnancy; 
cocaine use during pregnancy; infant mortality and low birth weight; violence; major causes of mortality in less 
industrialized countries; and role of public health in state and national health reform. Instructor: Whetten. C-L: 
Global Health



Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL) 695

640S. Value for Money in Health Care: Rationing in Theory and Practice. SS, STS Determining 
which health interventions and programs are “worth it.” Resource allocation and priority setting in practice. 
Analytical topics of cost benefit and cost effectiveness. Prerequisite: Economics 101 or 201D. Instructor: Staff.
641S. Cancer in Our Lives: Film, Narrative, Fiction, History and Politics. EI, SS, STS Cancer and 
cancer research viewed through history, narrative, film, fiction. Covers how cancer affects the lives of individuals 
and families, how cancer research has changed, the politics of cancer research, and the academic-industry-
government ecosystem that gives rise to new cancer diagnostics and treatments. Intended for undergrads from 
humanities, social sciences or sciences and grad or professional students. Heavily discussion-based. Instructor: 
Cook-Deegan. C-L: Science & Society 641S
642S. Designing Innovation for Global Health: From Philanthropy to People. EI, SS, STS Explores 
the introduction, adaptation, and globalization across borders of health technologies, with emphasis on 
resource-limited settings. Students will critically examine how policy can influence and funding can enable 
(or not) their innovation and access in low- and middle-income countries. Topics include policies to minimize 
inequity, systems for sharing and owning knowledge, approaches to innovative financing, and ethical issues. 
Instructor: Staff. C-L: Global Health 642S
644S. Poverty, Inequality, and Health. EI, R, SS Impact of poverty and socioeconomic inequality on the 
health of individuals and populations. Attention given to both United States and non-United States populations. 
Topics include the conceptualization and measurement of poverty and socioeconomic inequality; socioeconomic 
gradients in health; globalization and health; socioeconomic deprivation across the life-course and health in 
adulthood; and public policy responses in the United States and elsewhere to growing health inequities in the 
age of globalization. Prerequisite: An introductory course in statistics. Seniors and graduate students only. 
Instructor: Staff. C-L: African & African American Studies 548S
645S. Global Inequality Research Seminar. ALP, CCI, R, SS Engagement of vertically integrated 
research teams in projects exploring racial and ethnic disparities exhibited and expressed in six arenas: 
employment, wealth, health, political participation, education, and arts and culture. Each team will produce a 
major paper that will qualify for submission to a refereed journal in the area relevant to the focus of the study. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. C-L: African & African American Studies 642S, Economics 541S, 
Sociology 642S, Political Science 642S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 642S, Human 
Rights
646S. Strategic Storytelling: Narratives for Development. ALP, CCI, EI, SS With a broad array of 
storytelling mediums, we ask how “sticky” stories told about poverty or development strategically can add to our 
ability properly to understand poverty and to conduct appropriate development policies more effectively. What 
are the benefits and limitations of considering public policy problems by entering through the arts of storytelling 
and of storylistening? How do stories help readers/listeners become alive to ethical and cultural considerations 
previously unseen or unheard? How might these stories enable storytellers to tell stories on their own terms, 
opening up new and critically important terrains for public policy? Soft power strategy. Guest practitioners. 
Instructor: Admay. C-L: Study of Ethics 646S, International Comparative Studies 646S, Human Rights
647S. Legal Analysis for Development Governance. CCI, EI, SS Using case scenarios, we apply a legal 
analytical framework to development-related governance challenges in investment, trade, environment, land, 
community and human rights, health, corruption, corporate social responsibility, consumer literacy, children’s 
legal personality and other sectors. “Rules of the Game” and legal rules. Three levels: international, national 
(constitutional), community. De-mystify the way legal processes and legal authorities work (and don’t work) 
to advance development, and help public policy students and others engage effectively on the strength of this 
knowledge. For non-lawyers and those considering law careers. Guest practitioners. Case debriefings, briefings. 
Instructor: Admay. C-L: Political Science 682S, Human Rights
651S. Theories of International Political Economy. SS C-L: see Political Science 651S
667S. American Civil-Military Relations. R, SS C-L: see Political Science 667S
674. Media and Democracy. CCI, SS Examines the relationship between mass media and democracy in the 
United States, other developed democracies, and societies in transition. Seeks to explain how the media cover 
politics and public policy, examining the nature of media institutions, the economics of news production and 
consumption, and the strategic interplay of politicians, journalists, editors, and other actors who influence the 



 Public Policy Studies (PUBPOL)696

content of news. Instructor: Staff. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 563, Information Science + Studies, Policy 
Journalism and Media
676. Media and Social Change. CCI, R, SS, STS C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 676; also 
C-L: Political Science 619, Russian 516, International Comparative Studies, Information Science + Studies, 
Policy Journalism and Media Studies
677S. Federal Programs: Using the Paper Trail to Track Promises and Follow the Money. R, 
SS Follows a federal spending or regulatory program from inception through implementation. Research of 
primary records, including state and local governments, and standard federal sources of primary documents, 
to compare performance with expectations. GIS and other visualization techniques to analyze program 
implementation. Website creation to detail program performance. Instructor: Staff.
680S. Ethical Foundations of Innovative Technology Policy. EI, STS C-L: see Science & Society 680S

The Major
The public policy studies major is an interdisciplinary social science program designed to provide 

students with the skills, analytical perspectives, and substantive knowledge needed to deal effectively with major 
contemporary social problems. The course of study familiarizes the student with the kind of contribution each 
of several disciplines (political science, economics, social psychology, applied mathematics, history, and ethics) 
can make to one’s understanding of a broad range of contemporary issues such as environmental policy, child 
and family policy, health policy, and international issues such as trade and conflict resolution. Opportunities are 
provided, both in the classroom and through field experiences, for students to integrate this material and apply it 
to the analysis of specific public policy issues.

Students majoring in public policy participate in a variety of learning experiences including seminars, 
lecture and discussion classes, individual study, policy workshops, and a required internship (see below). In 
addition, students are urged to participate actively in programs sponsored by the Sanford School of Public Policy 
to supplement material covered in class.

Major Requirements. Public Policy Studies 155D, 301, 302; Public Policy Studies 303D or Economics 
201D; Public Policy Studies 304 (with Public Policy Studies 303D or Economics 201D as a prerequisite); one 
history course; Statistical Science 101; plus four Public Policy Studies 160-699-level elective courses, one of which 
must be a 401-699-level course. The required history course must include a public policy component. History 
classes taught by public policy faculty or other history department classes designated by the public policy director 
of undergraduate studies may be used to satisfy this requirement. No more than two transfer (including study 
abroad) credits may be counted toward the major requirements. Note: Public Policy Studies 450AS Glasgow 
Seminar in Public Policy is classified as a Duke course rather than a transfer course. A satisfactory policy-oriented 
internship, approved by the department, and enrollment in Public Policy Studies 120, a noncredit, Satisfactory/
Unsatisfactory internship course, is required.

Internship Program
The public policy studies internship program provides students with an opportunity to develop a basic 

understanding of one or more policy areas, to apply that understanding in an internship, and to return to the 
classroom to build on that knowledge and experience. 

Prior to beginning the internship, students must take all of the following courses: Public Policy Studies 
155D, 301 or 302, and Statistical Science 199L (Global Health 210 can substitute for Public Policy Studies 302). All 
of these courses are listed as prerequisites for Public Policy Studies 120. The internship application process takes 
place during the fall and spring semesters prior to the internship under the guidance, assistance, and approval 
of the Public Policy Studies Internship Office. Students whose internships are not preapproved by the internship 
office run the risk of not receiving credit for their internships. Upon completion of the internship, students are 
required to submit an analytical memo and a self-evaluation form. 

Public policy studies majors are strongly encouraged to take advanced follow-up coursework that builds 
upon the knowledge gained from their internship experiences. 



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 697

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
For departmental Graduation with Distinction, students are required to complete an honors seminar or 

independent study project and produce an honors research project. To be awarded Graduation with Distinction 
in public policy, a student must receive no less than an A- on the research paper as determined by the honors 
program director and to have at least a 3.40 average in the following subset of public policy studies courses: Public 
Policy Studies 155D, 301, 302D, 303D (or 304 if the student takes Economics 201D instead of 303D). If a student 
is judged to have done a clearly superior research project, as evidenced by a grade of A or A+ as determined by 
the honors program director, and if the 3.40 or higher average in the above subset of courses is attained, Highest 
Distinction in Public Policy is awarded. The proposed program of research must be approved in advance by the 
director of undergraduate studies. More details on the honors program are provided in the Handbook for Public 
Policy Majors, available from the office of the director of undergraduate studies. 

Religious Studies
Professor Goodacre, Chair; Professor Knust, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Brettler, Chaves, 
Goodacre, Jaffe, Knust, Lieber, Morgan, and Peters; Associate Professors Hassan, Prasad, and Winters; Instructor 
Need; Affiliated Faculty: Professors Aers (English), Wharton (Art, Art History & Visual Studies), Beckwith 
(English), and Surin (Literature); Associate Professor Hacohen (History); Visiting Assistant Professors Freeman 
(History) and Dubois; Research Professor Kadivar

A major and a minor are available in this department.
Study in the Department of Religious Studies arises from the recognition that religion, although it takes many 

forms, is a constitutive element of human existence individually and collectively. The study of religion involves 
a variety of perspectives and methodologies. The major religious traditions of the world—Christianity, Islam, 
Judaism, Buddhism, Hinduism, Confucianism, and Taoism—are studied in the ways they manifest themselves 
in our present-day societies and in their historical depth, examining their origins and sacred texts (often in the 
original languages) as well as their historical developments, rituals, artifacts, practices, and transformations over 
time. Beyond the study of individual religious traditions, the core notions of religion itself are also explored. 
Courses numbered from 100 through 199 include survey or general courses; courses numbered from 200 through 
399 include courses on more specific aspects of religion or religious traditions. 

All courses numbered 100 through 499, with the exception of those courses specially designated, are open 
to all undergraduates. Courses numbered 500 through 699 are open to upper-class students with the consent of 
the instructor. 

Courses in Religious Studies (RELIGION)
80S. Special Topics in Writing. Various topics with diverse readings and intensive writing. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Introduction to Religious Studies. CCI, CZ, EI Introduction to leading themes and concepts in the 
study of religions from the ancient world to the present. Course is divided into two parts: 1) what is religion? 
and 2) how is religion studied? A variety of religious traditions are examined as well as various theories and 
definitions of religion. Includes exploration of key ways in which different religions understand such social 
problems as violence and ideological conflict. Instructor: Morgan, Winters, Knust, or staff. One course.
110. Self, Society and Art in Modern Hinduism. CCI, CZ, EI An exploration of the beliefs, ethics, 
everyday and ceremonial practices, philosophies, mythologies, and movements that are part of the aggregately-
named religion of Hinduism. Instructor: Prasad or staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 111
120. Buddhism. CCI, CZ, EI Introduction to Buddhist texts, beliefs, rituals, and ethics in the past and 
present. Instructor: Jaffe or staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 114
140. Judaism. CCI, CZ Introduction to Judaic civilization from its origins to modern times. Instructor: Lieber 
or Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 140, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
141. Judaism Through Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, W An overview of major themes in Jewish practice, belief, 
identity, and history as presented through the medium of film. Emphasis will be on contemporary Judaism in 
Europe, America, and the Middle East. Instructor: Lieber. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 141



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)698

145. The Old Testament/Hebrew Bible. CCI, CZ, EI Historical, literary, ethical, and theological 
investigations of the ancient Near Eastern context of Israelite religion and culture. Instructor: Brettler or Peters. 
One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 145, Ethics Elective
150. Christianity. CCI, CZ, EI Introduction to Christian doctrine, ritual, social organization and ethics in the 
past and present. Instructor: Staff. One course.
151. Christian Theological Debates in their Historical and Cultural Contexts. CCI, CZ, EI Study 
of the major theological concepts of Christianity, in an attempt to understand when and why these concepts 
became part of the Christian legacy. We will study the theology of the Bible, the proclamations of the councils, 
the authoritative decisions of the churches, and the writings of the most influential Christian authors, up to 
our own day. For each of the focal points we will consider the historical and cultural contexts, and listen to 
the various participants in the debates, winners and losers. The course aims to clarify the main topics that are 
shared by all Christians as well as the topics that have led to division of Christianity in the past and to ongoing 
debate in the present. Instructor: Staff. One course.
155. The New Testament. CCI, CZ, EI Examination of the major books of the New Testament, covering their 
contents, ethical implications, historical and social setting, authorship, date, and theology. Instructor: Goodacre, 
Knust, or staff. One course.
156. Scripture: Judaism, Christianity, and Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Judaism, Christianity, and Islam 
are characterized as religions of the book. Their sacred texts are foundational to the faiths they represent. In 
spite of shared histories, overlapping contents, and parallel perspectives, their Sacred Scriptures diverge in key 
points of content, interpretation, and uses by their communities. In this course, students will be introduced 
to the history, contours, and content of the Hebrew Bible/Old Testament, the New Testament, and the Qur’an 
and hadith, exploring issues of scripture and authority, texts and manuscripts, translation and interpretation, 
performance, canonicity, ethical issues, and contemporary use. Instructor: Brettler, Goodacre, McLarney. One 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 138, Jewish Studies 156
160. Islam. CCI, CZ, EI Introduction to Islamic theology, practice, social institutions, and ethics in the past 
and present. This course uses original Islamic texts, academic prose, as well as film and fiction. Two short 
papers, quizzes, and brief presentation are required. Instructor: Kadivar. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 160, International Comparative Studies 160, Islamic Studies
175. Religions of Asia. CCI, CZ, EI Problems and methods in the study of religion, followed by a survey of 
the historical development, beliefs, practices, ethics, and contemporary significance of the Islamic religion and 
religions of south and east Asia. Instructor: Need or staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 
108, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 115
176. Japanese Religions: Buddhas, Gods, and Monsters. CCI, CZ, EI Buddhas, deities, and demons 
inhabit daily life in contemporary Japan, but many Japanese people insist that they are not religious. This 
course examines how “religion” itself is understood in Japan, as well as the various strands of Japanese religious 
life from prehistoric times until the present. We will explore traditions including Shinto and kami (deity) 
worship, Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, and the New Religions; and investigate the ethical, social, and 
political dimensions of these traditions. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 174
180S. Migration and Human Rights in Korea: Local and Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 178S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 105S
181. Silk Roads and China, Ancient and Medieval Transformations. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
History 135; also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 207, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 135
185. America’s Gods: Religion in the Public Square. CCI, CZ This course examines the role and 
manifestation of religions in American public life. It pays special attention to controversies that have shaped 
American legal, political, cultural, and social history. Topics include media representation of religions, public 
monuments, race, gender, sexuality, and religious diversity. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Religion. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Seminars: Special Topics. Topics vary from semester to semester. Open only to 
students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 699

190S. Special Topics Seminar. Topics and instructors to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201. Race, Film, and Sacred Value: Spike Lee and Quentin Tarantino. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI In this 
course we will examine and juxtapose the films of Spike Lee and Quentin Tarantino. Paying attention to stylistic 
and thematic matters, we will ask questions like: How do these two filmmakers represent violence, tragedy, and 
loss differently? How do their films become occasions for us to think about race, gender, history, and narrative 
in different ways? What are these filmmakers making us remember (and reimagine) and why is this important? 
How do themes like sacred value, redemption, and even hope function in their films? Instructor: Winters. One 
course.
208. Ancient Myth. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 208; also C-L: Theater Studies 228
212. Jews and Muslims, Judaism and Islam. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Jewish Studies 256; also 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 357, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 216, History 294, Islamic Studies
213S. Shamanism and Spirit Possession. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS Anthropological, psychological, and 
Religious Studies approaches to cross-cultural study of spirit possession and shamanism. Examination of in-
depth case-studies and comparative works, from both literate civilizations and non-literate cultures. Engage 
with contemporary concerns with nature and boundaries of personhood and embodiment and their relation 
to leadership. Instructor: Freeman. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 214S, History 215S, International 
Comparative Studies 256S
214S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 319S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 319S, Romance Studies 319S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 
352S
215. Greek and Roman Religion. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 264
216S. Hinduism and Judaism: Culture, Religion, and Identity. CCI, CZ Using interdisciplinary 
comparative frameworks, this course will study how two major world religions, Hinduism and Judaism, create 
a dynamic cosmos that brings abiding meaning to the daily lives of millions of believers. Explores concepts such 
as “ritual” and “myth” by examining Jewish and Hindu materials from early to modern times. The broader aims 
of the course are to understand how each tradition imagines time, space, and matter, and to explore how claims 
about the sacred are transformed in modernity. Ultimately, it aims to inspire reflection on how religion, identity 
and culture function in the modern world. Instructor: Brettler, Prasad. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 349S, Jewish Studies 215S
219S. Muslim Women Across the Ages. CCI, CZ, SS, W This course explores the diverse realities of 
Muslim women’s lives, from the origins of Islam to the present, through autobiographical and biographical 
accounts situated in their social, economic, political, and cultural contexts. The women we will encounter 
through textual and audiovisual materials represent a wide range of personal backgrounds, including scholars, 
mystics, merchants, philanthropists, poets, slavegirls, feminists, and Islamists. We will metaphorically 
travel across the globe and time to understand the multifarious facets of Muslim women’s lived experiences. 
Instructor: Hassan. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 209S, International Comparative 
Studies 365S, History 225S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 224S, Cultural Anthropology 224S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 219S
225. Islam in the Age of Trump: Race, Immigration, and Empire. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 225
228. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 186; also C-L: History 212, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 287, Islamic Studies
232S. Prophecy and Prophets: Then and Now. CCI, CZ Seminar version of Religion 232. Instructor: 
Peters. One course.
234. Martin Luther King and the Prophetic Tradition. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 317; also C-L: African & African American Studies 249, Public Policy 253, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 249, Human Rights
236S. Religion in Black America. CCI, CZ Seminar version of Religion 236. Instructor: Peters. One course. 
C-L: African & African American Studies 270S



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)700

237. Religion in American Life. CZ, EI A historical survey, with emphasis on the ways that religious 
experiences, beliefs, and traditions have found expression in religious communities and institutions, and 
in American public life. Instructor: Morgan or Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 233, Ethics 
Elective
238S. Activism & Christianity in Modern America. CCI, CZ, EI, W An exploration of the relation of 
Christian belief and practices with agitation for social change, with a focus on the United States from the colonial 
period to the present. Attention given to how identity, power, and suffering shape historical judgments about 
the intersection of religion and ethics. Close readings of primary sources drawn from autobiographies, letters, 
sermons, poems, and treatises. Figures may include John Wesley, Sojourner Truth, Frederick Douglass, Martin 
Luther King Jr., Pauli Murray, Dorothy Day, Thomas Merton, Daniel Berrigan. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Study of Ethics 238S, Political Science 244S, African & African American Studies 238S
240SL. West African Rootholds in Dance. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 335SL; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 220SL
241. Dance and Dance Theater of Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 356; also C-L: Theater 
Studies 233, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 246, International Comparative Studies 243
242. Kundalini Yoga and Sikh Dharma. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 357L
244. Dance and Religion in Asia and Africa. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 367; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 222, International Comparative Studies 214
247. T’ai Chi and Chinese Thought. CCI, CZ The philosophy, cosmology, and other aspects of traditional 
Chinese thought embodied in the martial art of T’ai Chi. Course conducted through readings and lectures as well 
as actual movement praxis. Comparisons between Western bio-medical notions of the body and those implied 
by T’ai Chi and other facets of Chinese thought and practice, such as Chinese medicine. Instructor: Need or staff. 
One course. C-L: Dance 255, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 247
248. Hip Hop and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI For many people, hip-hop and religion are incompatible. 
Hip-hop seems to be defined by materialism, arrogance, violence, misogyny, and a general rejection of sacred 
ideals and values. In this course, we will challenge these assumptions by exploring the intersections between 
hip hop and religion, while questioning what these terms mean and signify. We will examine aspects of hip-
hop (rap lyrics, video images, cultural rituals, films) that explicitly or implicitly express religious commitments 
and sensibilities. Instructor: Winters. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 248, English 299, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 299
250. Art and Christianity: A History of Christian Visual Culture. ALP This course is an introduction 
to the history of Christian visual culture from the early Middle Ages to the present. Beginning with controversies 
concerning the nature of images and their role in Christian worship, the course moves through successive 
eras of Christian history, focusing on Western Europe in the medieval and early modern eras, then following 
Christianity around the globe in the colonial period, ending with examination of modern European and 
American art that draws in different ways from the history of Christian ideas and practices. Readings and 
discussion in class focus on objects such as reliquaries, paintings, architectural settings, illustrated books, and 
prints. Instructor: Morgan. One course. C-L: Art History 251
254. Christian Ethics and Modern Society. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 220; also C-L: 
Political Science 253
257. Four Funerals and a Wedding: Introduction to Chinese Religious Life. CCI, CZ, R, SS This is 
an introductory course on contemporary Chinese religious life. Students are encouraged to think comparatively 
about religious life with sociological as well as historical imagination. We examine the major religious traditions 
in China today—Confucianism, Buddhism, Daoism, Christianity, Islam, and popular religious traditions—
through rituals and beliefs related to everyday life, such as birth, marriage, and death. Case studies include 
a history of the development of Confucianism; an analysis of essential concepts and practices in Daoism; 
a narrative of Catholicism in a Chinese village; a history of women’s mosques in China; and a study of 
contemporary popular religious practices. Instructor: Sun. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 257
258. Religion and the Novel in Modern India. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Indian writing in English, especially 
the novel, provides a unique understanding of religion in the world’s largest democracy. The novel has come of 



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 701

age in India, seen innovations and has influenced world literature. Indian and Indian-origin novelists have been 
Booker and Pulitzer winners, Commonwealth awardees, and Sahitya Akademi laureates. Course will examine 
how the Indian novel in English understands and mediates tradition and modernity, selfhood and society in 
a deeply diverse culture. Includes novels written during the twilight of British colonial rule, the Partition, and 
contemporary decades of rapid globalization and diasporic change. Instructor: Prasad. One course. C-L: Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 255, English 258
260. Pilgrimage and Tourism. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 336
261. Medieval Christianity in Film and Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Exploration of modern popular 
fictional representations of Christianity in the Middle Ages, including novels and films. Comparison with 
original medieval sources to understand relationship between present-day interpretations and actual medieval 
practice, and what this reveals about both cultures. Of particular concern: ethical issues concerning Christianity 
and violence, wealth, power and notions of democracy and modernity. Instructor: Dubois. One course. C-L: 
History 244, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 354, English 254
262. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see 
Italian 481; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 450, Literature 245, History 253
263. Mystical Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 322; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 323, Islamic Studies
264S. Religion & Journalism. CZ, R This course explores the many and complex ways in which religion 
converges with and diverges from journalism. Instructor: Carneiro. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 264S, 
Policy Journalism and Media Studies 264S
266S. Harry Potter and Religion. CZ This course explores the response of many Christians to the Harry 
Potter book series. Some theologically conservative Protestants have claimed that the Potter books contain 
satanic messages, promote witchcraft, and celebrate practices of the occult. By contrast, many supporters of the 
books insist they positively convey Christian messages. By investigating the debate, “Harry Potter & Religion” 
also examines the history of thought concerning “magic” and “religion,” the sometimes blurred boundaries 
between religion and science, and the place of technologies of enchantment in all of the above--magic, religion, 
and science alike. Instructor: Carneiro or staff. One course.
268. Religion and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI A study of the relationship between motion pictures and religion. 
Focus on the comparative portrayal of organized religions; expressions of religious life; and religious topics, 
such as God, evil and morality, in both Western and non-Western films in which contemporary artists and 
intellectuals explore the challenges of modernity. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Documentary Studies 268, 
Visual and Media Studies 269, Documentary Studies, Ethics Elective
269S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Polish 308S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 269S, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 308S, Human Rights
270. Black Gods and Kings: Priests and Practices of the Afro-Atlantic Religions. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 269; also C-L: African & African American Studies 269
271. Sex and Gender in the Hebrew Bible. CCI, CZ, EI Women in ancient Israel, early Christianity, and 
early Judaism in their contexts in the Near Eastern and Greco-Roman worlds, with attention to the relation 
between textual depictions and social reality and to the ethical issues raised by the continuing authority of 
biblical texts for matters of gender. Sources include the Bible, images from art, and archaeological remains. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 271, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
273. Astrology and Religion. CCI, CZ Introduces students to astrological divinational systems, methods 
and thought, with a focus on the astrology of Mesopotamian-Vedic-Greek thought 600 BCE-200 CE and Chinese 
I-Ching-based divination-astrological systems. Class explores these as key (persistent) examples of what Joseph 
Needham calls “correlative thinking,” a mode of thought that attempts to make sense of the world through the 
prediction/identification of a fundamental, dynamic pattern that is used as a template for making sense of one’s 
place in the world, such as the family, Yin-Yang and Five Element theories, the year and the patterns of the stars 
day and night, the body, numerological schemas, and so on. Instructor: Need. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 217



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)702

274FS. Religion & Politics: The Middle East Today. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Explore how religious beliefs 
and practices shape identities and politics at the individual, local, national and global levels; examine the 
complexities of the three Abrahamic religions, Judaism, Christianity, and Islam in their diversities as well 
as other religious traditions such as Baha’i and Zoroastrianism; examine how theological differences shape 
political conflicts and conversely, how entrenched political conflicts shape religious beliefs of their respective 
communities. Open only to students in FOCUS Program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Islamic Studies
276. Religion and Race. CCI, CZ, SS Discussion of various ways in which “race” has been defined and 
constructed in recent centuries using categories from biology, sociology, philosophy, genetics, anthropology, 
etc. Examines how religious traditions and practitioners have actively sought both to eliminate race and have 
been complicit in maintaining and defending it. Special focus on Judaism, Christianity, and Islam in the modern 
period. Instructor: Peters. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 276, International Comparative 
Studies 294
278S. Epics of India: Ethics, Politics, and Performance Traditions. ALP, CCI, CZ Wide variety of 
epics across linguistic, geographical, and community orientations. Moral discourses, literary theory relating 
to epic form, performance traditions and media representations of epic narrative, and connections between 
political ideology and epic visions. Instructor: Prasad. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 253S
279. Gandhi: Image and Reflection. CCI, CZ, EI Who is Gandhi amidst the thousands of images of 
him? Course focuses on the writings of, and the popular imagery about, one of the most inspirational figures 
of modern times, who evoked Einstein’s awe and shaped Martin Luther King and Nelson Mandela. Considers 
Gandhi’s experiments and journeys across South Africa and India to understand his ideas of justice, method of 
civic protest, and way of living-with-others. First part of course studies Gandhi’s autobiography and other key 
writings. Second part analyses Gandhi-centered visual culture (comic books, cartoons, films, monuments) and 
global influence. Aims to understand visually why Gandhi has become a legend and how he is within our reach. 
Instructor: Prasad. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 158, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 279, Human Rights
280S. Religion and Peace: Case Studies in Activism and Reconciliation. CCI, CZ, EI Too often 
religion is cited as the root of conflict, yet often religious leaders and religiously-affiliated NGOs create the 
impetus for peace-making initiatives. Course uses case studies from different areas of religious conflict to 
examine questions of tolerance and co-existence. Asks questions about place and purpose of dialogue, activism 
and humanitarian involvement; readings and discussions assess responses to conflict in Africa, Europe, and 
the Middle East. Concepts and pedagogies for peace-making brought to practical application during trip 
to Jerusalem and Bethlehem. Service-learning component requires at least 20 hours of service outside of 
class time. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 280S
281. American Apocalypse: Beat Generation Spirituality. ALP, CZ, EI, W Places Beat Generation 
spirituality in its contexts by study of sources and texts that influenced individual figures, specifically, the 
reading, world view, and practice of Kerouac, Snyder, Ginsberg, Burroughs, and di Prima; identifies the Asian 
and Native American texts and translations available to Americans in the post-war era and outlines Western 
influences (Thoreau, Spengler, Skinner, Reich, Neitzsche), reading these in relation to key mythemes of 
American identity and destiny in the post-War era. Instructor: Need. One course. C-L: Literature 281, English 
281
281A. The Cognitive Science of Religion and Morality. CZ, EI, R, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 
232A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 224A, Turkish 232A
282AS. Science, Ethics, and Society. CZ, EI Two courses. C-L: see Philosophy 385AS; also C-L: Public 
Policy 258AS
283. History and Culture of Iran. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
123; also C-L: History 248
284. Ritual, Performance, and Religion. ALP, CCI, CZ Exposes students to theories of ritual and 
performance (Turner, Schechner, Grimes, Geertz, Paden) in religious and non-religious contexts; compares 
contexts as a way of understanding common structures and what differentiates the religious/non-religious. 
Guest lecturers (from religion, dance, theater, psychology, English, visual and media studies, cultural 



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 703

anthropology) expose students to a range of approaches to specific kinds of ritual and performance. Possibly 
involves both class and individual trips to local religious events and performances for field work exercises. No 
prerequisites. Instructor: Need. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 284, Dance 284, Visual and Media 
Studies 285, International Comparative Studies 266
285S. Religion and Technology. CCI, CZ, R, SS, STS Explores the production and consumption of 
technologies that were either inspired by spiritual views or made for religious purposes. Using primary 
and secondary sources, archival manuscripts, film, photography, and field trips to better understand these 
technologies and their place in the human imaginary. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + 
Studies 285S
286S. Religion in Cyberspace. CZ, EI, R, STS Is cybertechnology a religion? If so, what does that mean? 
Rather than an analysis of how Christians, Buddhists, Jews, or Muslims use cyberspace to practice their 
religions, this course will take up the thesis that cyberspace has challenged the very idea of what it means 
to be human and, in so doing, has itself become a religion. We will look at the “canonization” of eccentric 
technologists like Elon Musk and Steve Jobs, examine the startling philosophical ideas about personhood 
embedded in artificial intelligence, study communities of cyberspace users casual and obsessive, and look at the 
ways in which cyberspace is reshaping the political landscapes of the contemporary United States. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
287. Religion and Science. CCI, CZ, STS The diverse interactions of religion and science from the 
Renaissance to the present. The profound transformation of premodern science by seventeenth-century 
revolutions and nineteenth-century discoveries; in turn, the transformation of society, including religion, by 
modern science. Some consideration of physics and astronomy, but major focus on the impact of Darwinian 
anti-teleology and modern biology, especially animal studies, on “natural theology” and traditional arguments 
from design. Thinkers to be considered include Francis Bacon, Montaigne, Spinoza, Thomas Huxley, Albert 
Einstein, and E. O. Wilson. Topics include evolution, human consciousness, human identity, and the human-
animal boundary. Instructor: Kadivar or staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 237, Study of Ethics 287, Marine 
Science and Conservation
287S. Religion and Science. CCI, CZ, STS The diverse interactions of religion and science from the 
Renaissance to the present. The profound transformation of premodern science by seventeenth-century 
revolutions and nineteenth-century discoveries; in turn, the transformation of society, including religion, by 
modern science. Some consideration of physics and astronomy, but major focus on the impact of Darwinian 
anti-teleology and modern biology, especially animal studies, on “natural theology” and traditional arguments 
from design. Thinkers to be considered include Francis Bacon, Montaigne, Spinoza, Thomas Huxley, Albert 
Einstein, and E. O. Wilson. Topics include evolution, human consciousness, human identity, and the human-
animal boundary. Instructor: Kadivar or staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 237S, Study of Ethics 287S
288. Acts of Engagement. CCI, EI Whether called “service,” “mission,” “Seva,” “loving-kindness,” “tikkun 
olam,” selfless acts done in the service of others are a component of many of the world’s religious traditions. 
This course will explore the fundamental call to serve in a number of traditions. It will examine the works of 
community leaders from various religious traditions such as Dorothy Day, Abraham Heschel, Martin Luther 
King, Jr., and Said Nursi to unpack the elements in their traditions that led them to work with and for others. 
Special attention will be paid to Abrahamic traditions. The course will also put these concepts into practical 
service in the local community through partnerships with Durham agencies. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 288
290. Special Topics in Religion. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Religion. Seminar version of Religion 290. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. Individual guided readings in a field of special interest, under the supervision 
of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and 
interpretation of a previously approved topic. For first years and sophomores with departmental approval. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
292. Independent Study. See Religion 291. For first years and sophomores with departmental approval. 
Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and readings in a field of special interest, under 



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)704

the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. For first years and sophomores with departmental 
approval. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Research Independent Study. R See Religion 293. For first years and sophomores with departmental 
approval. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
295S. Black Muslims: Race, Religion, & Culture. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 295S; also C-L: African & African American Studies 295S, International Comparative Studies 222S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 296S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 295S, 
Human Rights
301D. Religion, Restrictions, and Violence. CCI, CZ, EI An examination of the historical roots and 
current manifestations of religiously-justified violence and disenfranchisement, with a focus on the Abrahamic 
traditions (Judaism, Christianity, and Islam). The violence treated will include the expressly physical as well as 
the more insidiously existential, including political and cultural marginalization. Major loci of exploration will 
include gender and sexuality; Israel-Palestine, and the intersection of contemporary identities. Topics include 
the nature of extremisms within each tradition, the challenges of assimilation and “modernity,” and the role and 
nature of citizenship and territory. Instructor: Antepli, Davis, and Lieber. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 301D, 
Political Science 303D, Public Policy 313D, Study of Ethics 303D, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 301D
320S. Modern Buddhism in Asia and America. CCI, CZ An examination of Buddhism in Asia, Europe, 
and the United States from the mid-nineteenth century to the present. Emphasis on global exchanges that 
resulted in the emergence of Buddhism in the United States and Europe and the transformation of Buddhism in 
Asia. Instructor: Jaffe or staff. One course.
321S. Buddhist Ethics. CCI, CZ, EI, W Survey of various Buddhist understandings of ethics, both classical 
and contemporary. How different Buddhist communities have responded to such ethical problems as the 
existence of evil, war, injustice, and suffering as well as contemporary Buddhist debates over abortion, ethnic 
fratricide, human rights, environmental problems, economic justice, and cloning. Instructor: Jaffe or staff. One 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 331S, Study of Ethics 321S, Marine Science and Conservation, 
Ethics Elective
323. Buddhist Meditation in Transformation: Historical, Scientific, and Medical Perspectives. 
CCI, CZ, EI An in-depth examination of the Buddhist path and techniques of self-transformation in various 
Buddhist cultures, both premodern and modern. The differing conceptions of the psychophysical person and 
the goals of Buddhist practice assumed by these meditative techniques will be investigated. As part of the 
examination of Buddhist meditation, students will have an opportunity to experience a range practices and 
to reflect on the role of meditation in the construction of Buddhist maps of human development. Not open to 
students who took this course as an 89S First Year Seminar. Instructor: Jaffe. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 315
323S. Buddhist Meditation: Cultivation Practices and Psychology. CCI, CZ, EI Buddhist paths 
and techniques of self-transformation in premodern and modern Buddhist cultures. Conceptions of the 
psychophysical person and goals of Buddhist practice assumed by these meditative techniques. Reinterpretation 
and modification of traditional meditation practices in contemporary Buddhist societies. Students who took this 
course as an 89S First Year Seminar are not eligible to enroll. Instructor: Jaffe. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 315S
324. Zen Buddhism: A Survey from Its Origins to the Present Day. CCI, CZ, EI An examination of 
Zen Buddhism from its origins to its global spread in the nineteenth-twentieth centuries. Instructor: Jaffe. One 
course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 314
326S. Literary Islam. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 328S; also C-L: 
Literature 328S
327S. Tibetan Buddhism: Culture, Ethics, Philosophy and Practice. CCI, CZ, EI, W Introduces 
students to history, practice, culture, and ethics of Tibetan Buddhism; contents include overview of Indian 
Buddhist practice and ethics; historical overview of Tibetan Buddhism with a focus on connections between 
the construction of Buddhist ideal types (lama and yogin) and political power; Tibetan Buddhist Philosophy; 
Buddhist transformation of ethical, social and cultural forms, including the shaman/king and gift exchange 



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 705

patterns, and analysis of the function of lineage within the construction of Tibetan polities and social order; 
readings include textbook surveys, biography and philosophical texts and poetry. Instructor: Need. One course. 
C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 386S
328. Buddhism and Sexuality. CCI, CZ, EI Critical examination of the relation of religion and sexuality 
with special attention to Buddhism. Discusses religious interpretations of sex, sexuality, and gender; the 
codification and normalization of these rules through texts, symbols, and practices; and recent challenges 
to these interpretations. Topics include homosexuality, same-sex marriage, abortion, contraception, gender 
equality, clerical marriage, married clerics’ wives, and clerical sexual abuse. Draws on religious theory, gender 
theory, and critical theory. Places Buddhism in conversation with Jewish, Christian, and Islamic traditions. 
Extensive class discussion. Instructor: Need or staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 286, 
International Comparative Studies 389, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
330S. Atheism and Buddhism. CCI, CZ, EI A critical examination of atheism and religions (Buddhism), 
with a focus on intellectual, religious, philosophical, and scientific debates about God, the origin of the universe, 
morality, evolution, neuroscience, happiness, enlightenment, the afterlife, and karma. Readings to be selected 
from philosophical, scientific, and religious writings. Authors will include some of the following: Charles Darwin, 
Bertrand Russell, Christopher Hitchins, Richard Dawkins, Deepak Chopra, Sam Harris, Owen Flanagan, 
Stephen Batchelor, and the Dalai Lama. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 351S
333S. Buddhism, Death, and Dying: Religious and Medical Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI A 
consideration how traditional Buddhist conceptions of dying, death, and the after life have shaped 21st-century 
approaches to death. After examining conceptions of death and death-bed practices, in Buddhism and the 
medical profession, we will consider the role played by American Buddhists in reshaping contemporary attitudes 
towards end-of-life care. Instructor: Jaffe. One course.
340. Jewish History, 1492 to the Present. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 251; also C-L: 
Jewish Studies 251, International Comparative Studies 253, Ethics Elective
342. The Holocaust. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 297; also C-L: Jewish Studies 342, 
Political Science 262, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 297, Human Rights
350S. Non-Canonical Gospels. ALP, CZ, EI Historical-critical study of early non-canonical Christian 
Gospels, with special reference to the Gospel of Thomas, the Gospel of Peter, the Protevangelium of James, 
the Infancy Gospel of Thomas, Papyrus Egerton 2, Gospel of Mary, Gospel of Judas, Gospel of Philip, Dialogue 
of the Savior and Secret Mark; their relationship to other early Christian texts, their view of Jesus, their place 
in early Christianity; questions of authority, canon, canonical-bias, and concepts of heresy and orthodoxy. 
Instructor: Goodacre. One course.
351. Jesus and the Gospels. CCI, CZ, EI Investigation of Jesus as he is portrayed in the Synoptic Gospels 
(Matthew, Mark, and Luke) and John, looking also at literary relationships, dates, and historical contexts, with 
special focus on the historical Jesus, eschatology, parables, stories about the miraculous, passion narratives, and 
gospel women. Instructor: Goodacre. One course. C-L: Classical Studies 322, Ethics Elective
352. The Life and Letters of Paul. CCI, CZ, EI Paul’s biography and character, the social and physical 
circumstances of his work, his thought, and its relationship to ancient Jewish and Hellenistic ethics and beliefs. 
Instructor: Goodacre. One course. C-L: Ethics Elective
353. Ethical Issues in Early Christianity. CCI, CZ, EI Investigation of two major transitions in the early 
Christian movement and their impact on the formulation of Christian ethics: Christianity’s transition from a 
sect within Judaism to a Greco-Roman religious movement whose constituency came largely from the “pagan” 
world, and its transition from a sect in danger of persecution to a religion favored and supported by Roman 
imperial authorities. How these transitions are reflected in early Christian attitudes toward, and practices 
concerning, poverty and wealth, war and military service, marriage and sexuality, capital punishment, slavery, 
and other issues. Instructor: Knust. One course.
354S. Christian Ethics and Modern Society. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 220S; also 
C-L: Political Science 253S
360. Jesus in Film. ALP, CCI, CZ Studies a variety of cinematic and television films that focus on Jesus; 
compares and contrasts documentary approaches with dramatic depictions; views the films alongside 



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)706

scholarship on Christian origins and asks what these films reveal about their creators, their social locations and 
their source material; investigates the reception of these films in both academic and popular culture. Instructor: 
Goodacre. One course.
361. The End of The World: Apocalyptic Arguments from Antiquity to the Present Day. ALP, 
CCI, CZ, EI Traces end-time arguments, predictions, and prophecies from the second-century BCE until the 
present day. Why are prophecies of doom so compelling? Why must time come to a stop? What happens after 
the world’s end? Who decides? Close study of the role of apocalyptic eschatology in Judaism, Christianity, and 
Islam across time and place provides a lens for interpreting more recent apocalyptic movements, texts, claims, 
and artistic productions. Instructor: Knust. One course.
367. Women and Sexuality in the Christian Tradition. CZ, EI, W Christian scripture, literature, and art 
abounds with female figures. From the Virgin Mary to female saints, the Christian tradition has memorialized 
extraordinary women as models for lay women. How did Christianity challenge and preserve norms for female 
behavior? How did ascetic women and female martyrs transgress gender expectations? This course navigates 
the pitfalls and opportunities that the study of women offers for understanding the development of Christian 
belief and institutions. We will trace how gender was theorized and normative behavior prescribed and enforced 
within the periods of Late Antiquity, the Middle Ages, Reformation and modern day. Instructor: Knust. One 
course. C-L: Study of Sexualities, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies, International Comparative Studies
368S. The Theology and Fiction of C. S. Lewis. ALP, CZ, EI A study of texts of cultural criticism, fantasy 
fiction, and theological and moral argument by C. S. Lewis; their dependence on the cultural situation in which 
they were deployed; an engagement with the interaction of magic, science, and religion; and the reasons for their 
continuing force and wide appeal. Instructor: Staff. One course.
370S. Understanding the Qur’an. CCI, CZ, EI Qur’an as central text of Islamic ritual and belief, national 
reflection, and transnational exchange for nearly all Muslims. Will examine question of translatability as well 
as issues of interpretation from non-Muslim, secular or non-theological perspectives. Possible usefulness of 
analogies to literary critical study of Bible. The Internet as a resource for exploring multiple interpretations by 
Muslims and non-Muslims. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 126S, Islamic 
Studies
371A. Religion, Security and Global Citizenship in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 326A; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 362A, Political Science 
395A, Public Policy 339A
372. Islamic Awakening: Revival and Reform. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 325; also C-L: History 444, Islamic Studies
373S. Islamic Mysticism. CCI, CZ, EI This course introduces the history and key concepts of Islamic 
spirituality through the lives, writings, institutions, and influence of Muslim sages, ascetics, and saints across 
Africa, Europe, Asia, and the Americas. Critical topics include Sufi origins, psychology, healing, music, poetry, 
politics, and the aspiration to beautify one’s self and society through connection with the Divine. Instructor: 
Hassan. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 380S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 373S, Study 
of Ethics 373S, History 380S, Islamic Studies, Ethics Elective
374S. Muslim Philosophy and Theology, an introduction. CZ, EI Philosophy and theology as the 
foundation of Shari’a law; Islamic philosophy as a part of medieval philosophy under the influence of Plato, 
Aristotle and Plotinus. Impact on western philosophers such as Thomas Aquinas; major concepts, issues of 
Islamic philosophy and translation of two trends: from Greek to Arabic, from Arabic to western languages. Brief 
discussion on mysticism, ethics and politics. Instructor: Kadivar. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 235S, Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 324S, Islamic Studies
375. Islamic Civilization I. CCI, CZ, EI First part of two-course sequence providing an extensive survey 
of Muslim peoples and institutions. The Middle Eastern origins and cultural attainments of medieval Islam. 
Instructor: Hassan or staff. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 256, History 210, Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 268, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 122, Ethics Elective, Information Science + Studies, Islamic Studies
376. Islamic Civilization II. CCI, CZ, EI Continuation of Religion 375. Instructor: Hassan or staff. One 
course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 257, History 211, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 269, Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 185, International Comparative Studies, Ethics Elective, Islamic Studies



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 707

377S. Religion and Politics in Post-Revolutionary Iran. CCI, CZ, EI Examines ethical crises of Islamic 
regime: Did Islamic Republic promote ethics or decline morality? Analyzes tensions between secularism, 
democracy and theocracy; semi-democracy and semi-dictatorship; Shi’i doctrine of imamate and the theory of 
guardianship of the jurist; I.RI. Constitution; the doctrine of justice versus the privileges of the ruling political 
order; the role of Shari`a in law making; controversial religious issues in reformist discourses; women’s rights; 
religious and ethnical minorities; identity, diversity and power; traditionalists, reformists and fundamentalists; 
the administration of two supreme leaders and six presidents; Shi’a authorities and revolutionary guards. 
Instructor: Kadivar. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 288S, Political Science 379S, History 265S
378S. Islam in Asia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Russian 370S; also C-L: History 209S, International 
Comparative Studies 370S, Islamic Studies
379S. Islamic Media. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 329S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 331S, Visual and Media Studies 342S
380. Muslim World: Transformations and Continuities. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 250; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 170, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
381. Rumi: Mysticism and Poetry. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
321
382SA. Transnational Muslims in Germany: Politics of Migration, Religion, and Culture. CCI, 
CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 380SA; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 323SA, International Comparative Studies 278SA, Cultural Anthropology 382SA
384S. Islam in the Americas. CCI, CZ, SS, W Explores how Muslim communities live and practice Islam 
in the American context. Examines diverse Muslim communities emerging from transatlantic exploration, 
trade in slaves, and migration as well as indigenous conversion. Discussion of religious and cultural identities 
of American Muslim peoples and consideration of questions of communal organization, religious authority, 
gender dynamics, youth culture, political and civic engagement, as well as American Muslim comedy and 
entertainment. Examination of impact of 9/11 upon American Muslims, their responses to the tragedy, and 
Americans’ shifting perceptions of Islam and Muslims Instructor: Hassan. One course. C-L: History 351S, 
African & African American Studies 274S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 230S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 374S, Islamic Studies, Human Rights
386S. Local Islams: Islamic Communities in the Area. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 339S
388S. Muslim Ethics and Islamic Law: Issues and Debates. CCI, CZ, EI Premodern judicial 
arrangements and the contestations surrounding their modern incarnations. Topics include bioethics, gender 
and family law, war and peace, environmental issues, and political ethics. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 206S, Study of Ethics 345S, Islamic Studies, Ethics Elective
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Religion. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Junior-Senior Seminars. Topics and instructors to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. See Religion 291. For juniors and seniors with departmental approval. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
392. Independent Study. See Religion 291. For juniors and seniors with departmental approval. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R See Religion 293. For juniors and seniors with departmental 
approval. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Religion 293. For juniors and seniors with departmental 
approval. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
399S. James Baldwin and Toni Morrison. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI This course will examine the novels 
and essays of James Baldwin and Toni Morrison, focusing on a range of topics: blackness, gender, sexuality, 
the relationship between race, religion, and nation, and the relationship between anguish and hope. While 
considering the differences between these authors, we will explore how Baldwin and Morrison converge on a 



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)708

set of ethical and existential themes and concerns. In particular, the course will focus on a shared “ethics of 
haunting,” a sense that a better future relies on our capacity to remember, mourn, and be unsettled by forms 
of racial and gendered violence that mark the past and present. Instructor: Winters. One course. C-L: English 
380S, African & African American Studies 322S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 402S
490S. Junior-Senior Seminars. Topics and instructors to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Honors Research. R, W Course credit contingent upon successful completion of Religion 494. Consent 
of the director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Honors Research. R, W Continuation of, and required for credit for, Religion 493. Prerequisite: 
Religion 493. Consent of the director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
503S. Moments in Black (Radical) Theory: From Ferguson to Rhodes Must Fall to Silent Sam. 
CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 503S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
503S, Political Science 589S, International Comparative Studies 504S
511S. The Fetish: The Role of Things in Spiritual, Economic, and Sexual Life. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One 
course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 512S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 511S
519S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 519S; also C-L: Jewish Studies 519S, Romance Studies 519S
526A. Religion and Civil Society in the Arab World. CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 526A
527S. Islam and Human Rights. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS The main focus of the course is inquiry about 
possibility of human rights for Muslims in the modern time. The notion of human rights is represented by 
the United Nations documents, while Islamic teachings are divided into Islamic ethics and Islamic law. The 
former contains universal values such as dignity, justice, mercy, love, and freedom. The latter, in its traditional 
iterations, suffers from issues of gender discrimination, religious intolerance, restriction of religious freedom, 
the problem of apostasy, and violent punishments. Students will survey major conservative and reformist 
Muslim approaches to human rights to foster the development of critical analytic and comparative skills. 
Instructor: Kadivar. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 527S
550. Archaeology of Palestine in Hellenistic-Roman Times. CCI, CZ, STS The study of material and 
epigraphic remains as they relate to Judaism in Hellenistic-Roman times, with special emphasis on Jewish art. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 550
552S. Live Images: Ancient and Medieval Representations of the Divine. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One 
course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 533S; also C-L: Classical Studies 558S, Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 507S
560S. Reading Heidegger. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 540S; 
also C-L: Literature 543S
564S. Toleration, Freedom of Conscience, and Religious Liberty. CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see 
Classical Studies 564S; also C-L: Political Science 588S, History 564S
580S. History of Buddhist and Christian Interactions. CCI, CZ The study of the global encounter 
between Buddhists and Christians from the sixteenth century to the present. Topics to be covered include 
missionary encounters, conversion, polemical literature, inter-religious dialogue, and religious exchange, as 
well as the portrayal of these interactions in literature and the arts. At least one previous course in Buddhism 
or Asian religions and a course in religious studies is recommended. Instructor: Jaffe. One course. C-L: Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 580S
581S. Pan-Asianism, Religion, and the State in Modern Asia. CCI, CZ, EI An examination of the 
interaction between religious institutions and the state in modern Asia. The role of religion in the formation of 
pan-Asian identity in Asia also will be investigated. Instructor: Jaffe. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 581S
606S. Hebrew Biblical Texts. Select prose and poetic Hebrew biblical texts. Prerequisite: Old Testament 
760 and 761 or equivalent. Instructor: Brettler. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 606S
607. Hebrew Prose Narrative. FL Focus on the grammar, syntax, and prose style of classical Hebrew 



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 709

composition; a comparative reading of modern and precritical Jewish and Christian commentary. Readings 
spanning the spectrum from the early Hebrew prose of Genesis and I and II Samuel to the late compositions 
of Chronicles and Ezra-Nehemiah. One year of classical Hebrew required. Consent of instructor required for 
undergraduates. Also taught as Old Testament 860. Instructor: Brettler, Chapman, Davis, Peters, or Portier-
Young. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 607
608. Classical Hebrew Poetry. FL The problem of defining and understanding what is “poetic” in classical 
Hebrew. Theories of Hebrew poetry from Lowth to Kugel and O’Connor illustrated with readings from Psalms, 
Isaiah, Job, and Jeremiah. One year of classical Hebrew required. Consent of instructor required. Also taught as 
Old Testament 861. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 608
609. Rabbinic Hebrew. FL Interpretive study of late Hebrew, with readings from the Mishnah and Jewish 
liturgy. Consent of instructor required for undergraduates. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 
609
610. Readings in Hebrew Biblical Commentaries. Selected Hebrew texts in Midrash Aggadah and other 
Hebrew commentaries reflecting major trends of classical Jewish exegesis. Consent of instructor required for 
undergraduates. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Jewish Studies 610
611. Studies in Apocrypha and Pseudipigrapha. CCI, CZ Selected documents of the Apocrypha and 
Pseudepigrapha examined exegetically and theologically in their relation to postexilic Judaism. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
612. Language and Literature of Dead Sea Scrolls. A study in interpretation. Prerequisite: A knowledge 
of Hebrew. Instructor: Staff. One course.
613S. Introduction to Jewish Studies. One course. C-L: see Jewish Studies 601S; also C-L: History 601S
620. Exegesis of the Hebrew Old Testament. A. Pentateuch B. Historical Books C. Major Prophets 
D. Minor Prophets E. Writings F. Proverbs G. Genesis Consent of instructor required for undergraduates. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
630-11. Exegesis of the Greek New Testament II: The Synoptic Gospels. R Concentration on the 
“classical” methods of studying the first three gospels: source criticism, form criticism, and redaction criticism. 
Some attention to textual criticism. Students expected to become proficient in using the Greek synopsis. 
Prerequisite: two years of Greek or the equivalent. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Goodacre. One 
course.
630-12S. Exegesis of Greek NT II: Hebrews. Consent of instructor required for undergraduates. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
630-2. Exegesis of the Greek New Testament: Romans. CZ, FL Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
630-6. Exegesis of the Greek New Testament: I and II Corinthians. CZ, FL Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
631. Biblical Interpretation in Early Christianity. CZ, EI How early Christian writers of the second—
mid-fifth centuries made meaning of the Scriptures in their own, postbiblical environments. Focus on the new 
historical, religious, and theological situations that required new readings of scriptural texts, the role of heresy 
and the ascetic movement in the development of biblical interpretation and canon development, and special 
problems that arose around these issues. Instructor: Staff. One course.
632. Origen. CZ, EI The systematic and apologetic writings of an important Alexandrian thinker and exegete 
of the third century. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 662
633. Augustine. CZ, EI The religion of the Bishop of Hippo in late antiquity. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 664
634. Early Christian Asceticism. CZ, EI The development of asceticism and monasticism in the first six 
centuries of Christianity. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 655, Study of 
Sexualities, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
635S. Exegesis of the Greek New Testament: John’s Gospel. ALP, CZ, R Discussion and analysis of 
the Gospel of John with a special focus on historical-critical approaches, including authorship, date, sources, 



 Religious Studies (RELIGION)710

theology, literary analysis, and relationship to other early Christian works. Prerequisite: two years of Greek or 
the equivalent. Instructor consent is required. Instructor: Goodacre. One course.
636S. Passion Narratives in Greek. This course offers a critical, historical approach to the Passion and 
Resurrection Narratives in the Gospels of Matthew, Mark, Luke, John and Peter. Participants in the course 
will analyze the texts from a variety of perspectives, focusing especially on source-criticism, form-criticism, 
redaction-criticism, textual criticism, feminist, and literary-critical approaches. This course is for master’s 
students who already have familiarity with the Greek texts. Instructor: Goodacre. One course.
660. Justice, Law, and Commerce in Islam. CZ, EI History and schools of Islamic jurisprudence; Islamic 
legal reasoning; approaches to ethics and procedural justice, the ethical regulation of commerce, including a 
detailed study of pertinent issues in Islamic law. Also taught as Law 568. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
African & African American Studies 575, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 659, International Comparative 
Studies, Islamic Studies
663. Islam and Modernism. CCI Cultural, religious, and ideological forces that shape Muslim responses to 
modernism. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Islamic Studies, International Comparative Studies
664. The Religion and History of Islam. CCI, CZ, R Investigation of the historical study of Islam: 
historiography as a discipline, the historical study of Islam in the Western world, Muslim views of Islamic 
history. Required critical essays and major research paper. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Islamic Studies, 
International Comparative Studies
665S. Islamic Philosophy & Mysticism (Sufi’s Approach to Philosophy). CCI, CZ, EI The course 
explores the critical analysis of the creative products of the human intellect in mystical experiences including 
the symbolic stories of Avicenna, al-Gazali, Ibn Tufail, Suhrawardi & Mulla Sadra. It covers the key points of the 
theoretical and practical mysticism such as nature of the man, asceticism, unity and final abode, Sufi’s style of 
life, four spiritual journeys, light and varieties, angelology, the archetypal world, vision and intellect, knowledge 
& presence, the hierarchy of knowing, the semantics of the modulation of being, reality & the circle of being, 
diversity in unity and unity in diversity, the unity of the knower and the known, unity of existence, and salvation. 
Instructor: Kadivar. One course.
680S. Buddhist Thought and Practice. CCI, EI A historical introduction to Buddhist thought and 
practice, with special attention to their interrelationship in the living religion. Instructor: Jaffe. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
690S. Special Topics in Religion. Subject varies from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major
Major Requirements. Ten courses. Religion 101 is required. At least six courses must be numbered 200 

or above. One course must be a religious studies independent study taken in the junior or senior year, a small 
group learning experience/seminar taken during the junior or senior year, or a religious studies honors project. 
The student will select, from a list of appropriate courses, at least one course apiece for each of three different 
religious traditions. In addition, the student, also in consultation with his or her advisor and with the advisor’s 
approval, will choose a set of four courses that constitute a thematic or methodological focus on a particular aspect 
of religion. Only two approved study abroad courses can count toward the major. Only one Duke Divinity School 
course can count toward the major, and that course cannot be equivalent to a course offered by the religious 
studies department. Students interested in taking Duke Divinity School courses should consult the director of 
undergraduate studies regarding credit toward the religious studies major.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The Department of Religious Studies has a program for Graduation with Distinction. This program is 

intended for the outstanding religious studies major whose grade point average is at least 3.5 in religious studies 
(and 3.3 overall) and who has demonstrated the desire and talent to pursue independent research. The student, 
under the supervision of an advisor, will produce an honors thesis of exceptional quality. The main advisor is 
normally a faculty member in the department already familiar with the student’s work. 



Religious Studies (RELIGION) 711

The Minor
The religious studies minor offers students specializing in another department or program the opportunity 

to enrich their studies by engaging in the consideration of religion.
Minor Requirements. A minimum of five religious studies courses, at least one of which must be 

numbered 200 or above. Minors are encouraged to take Religion 101. Only one approved study abroad course 
can count toward the minor. Only one Duke Divinity School course can count toward the minor, and that course 
cannot be equivalent to a course offered by the religious studies department. Students who wish to take Duke 
Divinity School courses should consult the director of undergraduate studies regarding credit toward the religious 
studies minor.

Foreign Languages
To prepare for graduate or professional study of religion, the department recommends that students 

complete at least four courses in college-level study, or the equivalent, of a modern foreign language. Master 
of arts and doctor of philosophy programs often require examination in one or two modern foreign languages. 
Those planning to study religious traditions whose documents are in a language other than English should begin 
appropriate language study as part of their undergraduate preparation.

Romance Studies
Associate Professor Eisner, Chair; Associate Professor Vilches, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Senior 
Lecturer Valnes Quammen, Acting Director of French Language Program; Professor of the Practice Paredes, 
Director of the Spanish Language Program; Associate Professor of the Practice Fellin, Director of the Italian 
Language Program; Professors Dainotto, Dubois, Hardt, Jameson, Jenson, Longino, Mignolo, Moi, Sieburth, 
and Solterer; Associate Professors Aidoo, Eisner, Furtado, Gabara, Milian, Rodríguez-García, Rosa, Saliot, Viego, 
and Vilches; Assistant Professor Ziolkowski; Professors Emeriti Bell, Dorfman, Finucci, Garci-Gómez, Greer, 
Hull, Kaplan, Keineg, Orr, Stewart, and Thomas; Research Professor Garrèta

A major (in French, Italian, Portuguese, Spanish, or Romance studies) and a minor are available in this 
department.

Prerequisites for all courses numbered 300 or above not taught in English:

Courses: French 204, 212 or equivalent
Italian 204, 212, 213, or equivalent
Portuguese 203 or 204, or consent of instructor
Spanish 204, 212, or equivalent

or SAT II: French: score of 640+
Italian: score of 600+
Spanish: score of 660+

or AP: Italian or Spanish literature exam: score of 4 or 5
French or Spanish language exam: score of 5; Italian 
language exam: score of 4 or 5

Students may submit AP scores for credit as well as placement in French, Italian, or Spanish. Credit is 
awarded as follows:

• 4 or 5 on AP Literature = credit for 204/placement at 300 level
• 5 on former AP Language = credit for 204/placement at 300 level
• 5 on new AP Language and Culture = credit for 204/placement at 300 level
• 4 on new AP Language and Culture = placement in 204
Students who, by reason of foreign residence, have advanced proficiency in French, Italian, Portuguese, or 

Spanish must be placed by the director of undergraduate studies.



 Romance Studies (ROMST)712

Courses in Romance Studies (ROMST)
89S. First Year Seminar in Romance Studies. Topics vary each semester offered. This course is restricted 
to first-year students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Romance Studies. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Topics in Romance Studies. Topics vary each semester offered. Open only to students in the Focus 
Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Topics in Romance Studies. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
195FS. Cognition, Identity, and Linguistic (Human) Rights. CCI, EI, SS Explores identity with respect 
to cognitive or mental processes that guide social interaction and how people negotiate identity, particularly 
in situations of linguistic discrimination. Examines linguistic, cultural, and minority rights from a cognitive 
and social perspective and how people adjust their cultural competence in situations of multiculturalism and 
multilingualism; all in connection to the right of maintaining one’s identity as well as sustaining human rights 
in general. Readings and case studies will focus mostly on situations involving Spanish and languages in contact 
with Spanish. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: Paredes. 
One course. C-L: Linguistics 195FS
201. What Is Europe?. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Exploration of the idea of Europe as a political, moral, and cultural 
identity. Examines the construction of such identity throughout history, ending with today’s European Union, at 
a moment in which integration of “Eastern” countries such as Turkey or Russia remains a hotly debated issue. 
Consistent attention devoted to literary, cinematic and artistic works which attempt to imagine a European 
Culture, as well as the evolution of aesthetics, and literary and art history. Instructor: Dainotto or staff. One 
course. C-L: French 201, Italian 201, Literature 273, International Comparative Studies 240
201P. Europe in Theory - Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian or French, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 201. Students desiring credit toward their major or minor should enroll in their 
respective language focus. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto, Solterer, or staff.
202. Imagining Europe: Arts, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, CZ Investigation of defining debates on 
European culture and the fiction which shapes them. In collaboration with Nasher Museum. Focus on literature 
and the visual arts of France, Italy, Portugal, Spain. Comparative analysis of key issues, including arts of 
migration, multilingualism, cultural and political relations within and without Europe, development of financial 
systems. Major authors: Marco Polo, Khatibi, Montaigne, Montesquieu, Balzac, Calvino, Némirovsky, Semprún, 
Saramago. Research in museum collections on major pieces. Instructor: Solterer, staff, with Nasher staff. One 
course. C-L: Literature 274, French 429, Art History 202, Visual and Media Studies 202
202P. Imagining Europe: Language, Culture, Politics Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, 
requiring concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 202 or French 429. Further information available from 
instructor. Instructor: Solterer, staff. C-L: French 429P
205. The Problem of Love in Western Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Love causes problems. It can 
inspire passion or madness; foster alliances, destroy friendships, provoke war, broker peace. It impacts 
communities and raises fundamental questions about life. Exploring amorous discourse from two millennia 
–Plato’s erotic ascent, Virgil’s deceived Dido, Ovid’s rules of seduction, Boccaccio’s legitimation of female 
desire, Michelangelo’s homoerotic poetry, Leonardo’s sublimated impulses, Foscolo’s tragic obsession, comic 
uncertainties of Svevo’s modern lovers, and love from afar in Montale—we will see what changes, what persists, 
and ultimately come to understand what we mean when we talk about love today. Instructor: Eisner. One 
course. C-L: Italian 225, Literature 205, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 304
205P. The Problem of Love in Western Literature - Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 205 or Italian 225. Further information available from instructor. 
Instructor: Eisner. C-L: Italian 225P
206. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Comprehensive examination of several 
important works of modern European short fiction by authors such as Kafka, Woolf, Svevo, Sartre, Joyce, 
Proust, Mann, Schnitzler, Gogol, and Calvino. While stories will be contextualized historically, culturally, and 
geographically, course is organized into thematic units, including animals, home, punishment, and love, to 



Romance Studies (ROMST) 713

facilitate comparative analysis. Students engage critically with concepts such as identity, trauma, genre, and 
narrative form. No prerequisites. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One course. C-L: Italian 220, German 243, Literature 
244, English 244, Jewish Studies 243, International Comparative Studies 212
206P. Modern European Short Fiction Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 206 or Italian 220. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Ziolkowski. C-L: Italian 220P
207FS. Language and Identity. CZ, R, SS Language is a central and pervasive feature of human identity 
through which we portray ourselves and negotiate social identities. This course examines how language and 
identity are linked and interact. Using examples from media, film, pop culture and ethnographic data, we will 
explore how speakers portray themselves and negotiate social identities through language, and how ideas about 
it inform our understanding and interpretation of society and speakers within it. We will look at the use of 
different linguistic resources (such as accent, grammar vocabulary and style) to express different identities and 
how society at large perceives and interprets them. Open only to Focus Program students. Department consent 
required. Instructor: Fellin. One course. C-L: Linguistics 218FS
217FS. Language, Thought, and Culture. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 217FS
220. Trauma and Global Mental Health in Haiti. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Global Health 323
235SL. Capoeira: Practice and Culture. ALP, CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Dance 235SL; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 221SL, African & African American Studies 221SL
242A. The Creative Brain: Literature, Arts & Cognition. ALP, NS, STS Exploration of creativity 
and the relationships among literature, the visual and performing arts, cognition, and contemporary 
neuroscience. Literary and visual studies within a French context of perceptual knowledge, aesthetics, 
expectation, imagination, and social cognition. Close reading of literature and art in relation to progressive 
movements in Parisian society, and phenomenological studies of the cognitive processes involved in the 
creation and perception of visual and performing art forms. Instruction in English. Offered only in Duke in Paris 
Neurohumanities Program. Instructor: Jenson, Wardle. One course. C-L: French 342A, Neuroscience 242A, 
Visual and Media Studies 246A
256. Italian Baroque Art. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 256; also C-L: Italian 256, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 246
258S. Women and Power in the Renaissance. CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 258S; also C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 248S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 258S
278. European Art 1760-1850. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 278; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies
279. European Art 1850-1900. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 279; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies
282S. Modernism and the Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see English 282S; also C-L: Art History 
281S, German 282S, Literature 282S
290. Special Topics in Romance Studies. A comparative study of languages, literatures, and/or cultures 
related to Romance Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Topics in Romance Studies. Topics in languages, 
literatures, and/or cultures related to Romance Studies. Offered as part of a Duke Administered Global 
Education program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Topics in Romance Studies. A comparative study of languages, literatures, and/or cultures related to 
Romance Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291-1. Independent Study. Individual study in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of 
a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and Director of Undergraduate Studies required. In English. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
317. The Body in Art in Early Modern Europe: Power and Limits of Corporeal Representations. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 317; also C-L: Dance 317, Theater Studies 245, Medieval and 



 Romance Studies (ROMST)714

Renaissance Studies 217
319S. Andalusia: Muslim, Jewish, Christian Spain. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 319S; also C-L: Religion 214S, Jewish Studies 319S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 352S
321. The Modern Caribbean after Emancipation. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 321; also C-L: 
African & African American Studies 240, Cultural Anthropology 322, International Comparative Studies 319
327S. Romance Studies Literature and Culture. A literary, cross-cultural critique focusing on specific 
topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
327SP. Romance Studies Literature and Culture Preceptorial. Offered in either French, Italian, 
Portuguese, or Spanish, this zero credit preceptorial requires concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 327S. 
Involves extra class time and assignments in order for Romance Studies 327S to count toward a major or minor. 
See instructor for additional information. Instructor: Staff.
330S. Undocumented America in Literature. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South 330S; also C-L: Literature 329S, Cultural Anthropology 329S
337. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, W This course explores the 
portrayals of America, especially the United States, from authors and directors who are not American and who 
often have never even seen America. We will read short stories, novels, and graphic novels and watch films. 
What do these works from other parts of the world have to say about dreams, race, love, immigration, and space 
in America? We will discuss imaginary Americas in order to understand these important works within their 
contexts, to examine how foreign representations of America have contributed to our idea of America, and to 
consider what imagined Americas suggest about us here in North Carolina. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One course. 
C-L: Italian 337, English 237, Jewish Studies 337, Literature 337
337P. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 337S or Italian 337S. Further information available from instructor. 
Instructor: Ziolkowski. C-L: Italian 337P
341S. Perspectives on the Amazon. CCI, CZ The Amazon has been a source of awe to outsiders at least 
since the first Europeans navigated the Amazon River in 1542. While early explorers searched the forest for a 
mythic city of gold, contemporary travelers, scientists, and concerned citizens look to the Amazon as the key 
to our endangered future. Focusing on a variety of textual and visual representations, we will deal with major 
themes in the history of the Amazon and consider the ways in which this vast and widely depicted region eludes 
representation, holding entirely different and contending meanings to distinct socio-cultural groups. Our 
sources include works by indigenous thinkers and cultural producers. Instructor: Furtado. One course. C-L: 
Portuguese 341S, Latin American Studies 341S, Literature 341S
341SP. Perspectives on the Amazon Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Portuguese, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 341S or Portuguese 341S. Further information available from instructor. 
Instructor: Furtado. C-L: Portuguese 341SP
350. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350; also C-L: Neuroscience 250, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 350, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 350
350S. Brains, Everywhere. CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Literature 350S; also C-L: Neuroscience 250S, 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 350S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 350S
362D. Soccer Politics. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Explores global history of soccer with focus on Europe, Africa, 
and Latin America. Examines development and spread of the game, institutions such as FIFA, biographies 
of legendary players, and economics of the sport. Examines philosophical and ethical issues raised by soccer, 
and ways the sport condenses, channels, and at times transforms politics. Materials include works of history, 
anthropology, literature, journalism, memoirs, documentary films, and footage of classic games. Students will 
contribute to Soccer Politics blog and pages. Students enrolled under foreign language discussion sections will 
do reading, writing, research, and discussion in the language. Instructor: Dubois. One course. C-L: History 
266D, International Comparative Studies 204D
365S. Latino/a Popular Culture. ALP, CCI Examines connections between US Latina/o and Latin 
American populations mediated by contemporary popular culture and the world of the commodity. Explores 
sociocultural and political issues in US national culture, the ways US Latina/o cultures dialogue across the 



Romance Studies (ROMST) 715

Americas, and how Latina, Latino, LatinX, and Latin American bodies inhabit particular cultural and geographic 
contexts. Addresses how popular cultural forms are developed, contested, or resolved vis-à-vis issues of 
difference, multicultural inclusiveness, domestic history, narratives of exile and migration. Materials covered 
include films, documentaries, television shows, art, advertising, comic strips, food fusions, music. Instructor: 
Milian. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 365S
379S. The Detective Novel. ALP, CZ What is a detective novel, and how does it “work”? By looking at 
synchronic and diachronic transformations of the genre—from British Sherlock Holmes to the South African 
“noir-fantastic”—the course investigates the structure of literary genres and their adaptability to different social, 
cultural, and civilizational contexts. The course has no prerequisites and is designed for majors and minors in 
Romance Studies and the humanities in general. Instructor: Dainotto. One course. C-L: English 376S, Literature 
379S, Italian 379S
379SP. The Detective Novel Preceptorial in Italian. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 379S or Italian 379S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Dainotto. C-L: Italian 379SP
380. France and Africa: The Politics and Culture of (Post-)Coloniality. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 380; also C-L: History 372, International Comparative Studies 364
380P. France and Africa: The Politics and Culture of (Post-)Coloniality Preceptorial. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 380P
387S. Mapping Language Justice in Durham and Beyond. CCI, SS This DukeImmerse course brings 
together issues of language discrimination or linguicism, linguistic profiling as proxies for other types of 
discrimination. In the city of Durham multiple languages converge and interact, multiple dialects of these 
languages interact and co-exist. This environment offers a space to observe language as a source of inequities. 
This course examines the question of Language Justice across socio-political and economic spaces. Students will 
use critical discourse analysis to examine a diversity of texts. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Paredes. 
One course. C-L: Linguistics 387S
388S. Food, Culture, and Society. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This DukeImmerse course provides a broad overview 
of food as culture and its role in society. Exploration of the intersections between food and identity from gender, 
ethnic, class, religious, and political identities to how people use food to develop a sense of themselves as ethical 
beings. Food and democracy and food activism. Readings from anthropological, sociological, linguistic, and 
literary writings with ethnographic observations in local communities of practice. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Fellin. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 389S, Sociology 388S, Italian 388S
389S. Linguistic Human Rights in the Americas. CCI, EI, SS This DukeImmerse course brings together 
topics of language and human rights, focusing on situations of linguistic disparities in the Americas. Explores 
questions of language contact, bilingualism and endangered languages from perspective of social injustices and 
human rights. Examines how language aids in the construct of social context and institutions and how it reflects 
and sustains social realities, reflecting on situations of oppression and how they are associated to sociolinguistic 
attitudes and behavior. Explores overlap of linguistic human rights with cultural and minority rights; all in 
connection to the right of maintaining one’s identity as well as sustaining human rights. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Paredes. One course. C-L: Linguistics 389S
390. Special Topics in Romance Studies. A comparative study of languages, literatures, and/or cultures 
related to Romance Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Romance Studies. A comparative study of languages, literatures, and/or cultures 
related to Romance Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Individual study in a field of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of 
a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and Director of Undergraduate Studies required. In English. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified students by consent of 



 Romance Studies (ROMST)716

instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395T. Romance Studies Health Humanities Lab Tutorial. R Group independent studies of up to 
5 students on research topics offered by faculty co-directors or core associated faculty members of an FHI 
Humanities Lab. Students work in small team-based project groups, meet once weekly in the larger unit of the 
number of group independent studies offered by the FHI Humanities Lab, and once weekly in a sub-group. 
Students encouraged to carry out their work, which will include apprentice-style learning, in the Lab. In addition 
to work toward the faculty-defined research deliverable, students develop a more specific topic related to small 
group project for an individualized final project, to be presented to tutorial group. Consent of instructor is 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
450. Second Language Acquisition and Research. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 497; also 
C-L: Neuroscience 450
489S. Screening Europe. ALP, CCI, CZ Course debates identification of Europe as a political, historical and 
social entity from the standpoint of cinema. Provides students with an introduction to the notion of “European 
cinema” from 1945 to the present-day crisis of Brexit and migration. Explores issues concerning interactions 
and relations between national and transnational identities, the local and the global, post-colonialism and 
multiculturalism, migration and nationalism, and Eastern versus Western Europe. Instructor: Saliot. One 
course. C-L: French 489S, International Comparative Studies 479S, Literature 489S, Visual and Media Studies 
489S
489SP. Screening Europe Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
Romance Studies 489S or French 489S. For French minors and majors, and all students who want to improve 
their linguistic skills. Students lead class discussions in French, write all their assignments in French and give an 
oral presentation in French. Further information available from the instructor. Instructor: Saliot. C-L: French 
489SP
490. Topics in Romance Studies. A comparative study of languages, literatures, and/or cultures related to 
Romance Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Topics in Romance Studies. A comparative study of languages, literatures, and/or cultures related to 
Romance Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490SP. Preceptorial in Romance Studies. A preceptorial in French, Spanish, Portuguese, Italian or Creole 
requiring concurrent enrollment in ROMST 490S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Staff.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Honors Thesis. R Preparation and writing of research paper for departmental distinction. Consent 
of both the instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. See section on honors in Bulletin. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
495S. Latino/as in the Global South Capstone - Global/Local Contexts. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: 
see Latino/a Studies in the Global South 495S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 495S, Latin American Studies 
495S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 495S
501S. Methods and Theories of Romance Studies. ALP, CCI, R Provides students in any PhD track of 
the department of Romance Studies with fundamental training in both general literary theory and in the specific 
methods of romance criticism. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Literature 540S
505S. Visual Studies from the Global South. ALP, CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see Art History 505S
509S. Issues in Second Language Acquisition. FL, R, SS Advanced applied linguistics course examining 
different areas of interests in the field of second language acquisition (SLA). Overview of main research areas in 
the field. Topics include: Language Testing, Action Research in SLA, Communicative Language Teaching, the 
role of classroom instruction in SLA, or the relationship between SLA research and foreign language learning. 
Students expected to become conversant with the research literature in the area and the different methodologies 



Romance Studies (ROMST) 717

used in SLA research, carry out a classroom-based quantitative and/or qualitative research project, and produce 
a research paper that might be submitted to relevant conferences. Topics vary each year. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
520S. Translation Studies and Workshop. ALP, CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 530S; 
also C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 502S
521S. Anthropology and History. SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 501S; also C-L: History 
572S
522S. Africa, Cuba, Brazil: Great Powers of the Black Atlantic. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 610S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 610S, History 610S
530. Imagining Community in Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan. ALP, CCI, CZ This comparative 
seminar explores the controversial and complex works of Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan. Boccaccio, 
illegitimate, impoverished son of a Florentine banker, and Christine de Pizan, an Italian woman isolated at 
court in Paris during a civil war both use literary form to construct communities—local, linguistic, national, 
intellectual, gendered, universal. This seminar attempts a different conception of literary community beyond 
national types and hierarchies offering students opportunities to explore their works and modern critical 
debates about them. All works available in translation. Readings in original languages and preceptorial meetings 
for majors and graduate students. Instructor: Eisner or Solterer. One course. C-L: French 531, Italian 531
530P. Imagining Community in Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan Preceptorial. A preceptorial in 
French or Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 530, French 531, or Italian 531. Further 
information available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner or Solterer. C-L: French 531P, Italian 531P
532S. Comparative Modernisms. ALP, CCI, R This course investigates the debated term modernism. 
We will explore a wide range of critical works on periodization, avant-garde movements, irony, stream of 
consciousness, and other key terms, to examine several major literary works of modernism, including selections 
from Woolf, Rilke, Marinetti, Pirandello, Musil, Joyce, and Kafka. Each student will select a representative work 
from a national literary tradition to contextualize for the class and research. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One course. 
C-L: Italian 532S, Literature 532S, German 535S
532SP. Comparative Modernisms Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 532S or Italian 532S. Enrollment allows the course to count toward the 
language requirement for the Italian major or minor. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Ziolkowski. C-L: Italian 532SP
540S. Memory and Documentary Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI Course focuses on work of 
several leading Latin American filmmakers from Brazil, Chile, Argentina, and Cuba. Explores problems such as 
construction of memory in the wake of repressive dictatorships, relationship between revolutionary imagination 
and urban decay in present day Cuba, cinema’s potential as a tool for cross-cultural explorations of memory and 
time, including relationship between past and present and our understanding of “contemporary.” Instructor: 
Furtado. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 540S, Documentary Studies 540S, Literature 544S, Latin 
American Studies 540S
590. Topics in Romance Studies. Topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Seminar in Romance Studies. Topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590SP. Special Topics in Romance Studies - Preceptorial. A preceptorial in French, Italian, Portuguese 
or Spanish requiring concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 590S. Further information available from 
instructor. Instructor: Staff.
612S. Theories of the Image: The Image in Walter Benjamin. ALP One course. C-L: see Literature 
612S; also C-L: German 512S, Visual and Media Studies 612S
690. Topics in Romance Studies. Topics to be announced. Instructor: staff. One course.
690S. Seminar in Romance Studies: Special Topics. Topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.



 Creole (CREOLE)718

Creole

Courses in Creole (CREOLE)
101. Elementary Creole I. FL An introduction to the essential elements of Haitian Creole or Kreyòl 
language and aspects of Haitian culture. The first of the two-semester sequence of elementary Haitian Creole or 
Kreyòl, the course provides practice in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing the language, culturally 
contextualized through units on health care, Haitian women’s rights issues, and unpaid child servants 
(restavèk). Students will acquire enough vocabulary and idioms to be able to interact with Haitians. Taught in 
Haitian Creole. No prerequisite. Staff: Pierre. One course.
102. Elementary Creole II. FL Second course in the two-semester sequence on elementary Haitian Creole 
provides essential elements of Creole language and aspects of Haitian culture. Course is designed to help 
students develop speaking, listening, reading, and writing skills in Haitian Creole. Students will be exposed to 
different aspects of Haitian culture through films, storytelling, games, music, and proverbs. Pre-requisite: Creole 
101 or a comparable level of previous Creole language experience, such as DukeEngage experience in Haiti or 
familial background in Creole. Taught in Haitian Creole. Instructor: Pierre. One course.
203. Intermediate Creole I. FL First semester of intermediate Haitian Creole or Kreyol. This course moves 
beyond survival skills in Creole to more complex social interactions and expressions of analysis and opinion. 
Intermediate skills in understanding, speaking, writing, reading will be contextualized within a broad range 
of issues such as rural life in Haiti, religion, frenchified Creole vs popular Creole, through texts, poems, and 
excerpts taken from novels in Haitian Creole. Students will learn to carefully follow contemporary events and 
debates in Haitian culture using internet resources in Creole. Pre-requisite: Creole 102 or equivalent. Taught in 
Haitian Creole. Instructor: Pierre. One course.
204. Advanced Intermediate Creole. FL Second semester of Intermediate Creole. Sharpens students 
reading and communication skills, further mastering Haitian Creole grammar at an advanced level, gaining a 
deeper understanding of the different components of Haitian culture while becoming familiar with the works 
of several Haitians artists (art, literature, poetry, and music) that play a significant role in promoting Haitian 
culture. Recommended prerequisite: Creole 203 or equivalent. Instructor: Pierre. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Haitian Creole Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified students by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Jenson or staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Haitian Creole Studies. Topics vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.

French

Courses in French (FRENCH)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
89S-1. First-Year Seminar in French. FL Seminar for first-year undergraduates with the desire and ability 
to take courses in literature, history, culture, art, cinema, or drama in French at the 300-level, equivalent in 
all respects to a 300-level course in French. Completely satisfies the foreign language requirement and counts 
toward a major or minor in French. Topics vary. Prerequisite: SAT II score of 640 or above, AP Language score 
of 5. Native speakers or students who did high school work in French encouraged to enroll. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
101. Elementary French 1. FL Introduction to the essential elements of French language and aspects of 
French/Francophone cultures. Open to students who have never studied French before, or to those who have 
not studied French more than two years in high school. Practice in understanding, speaking, reading, and 
writing the language. Includes computer, video, and audio labs. Five class meetings a week. Instructors: Tufts 
and staff. One course.
102. Elementary French 2. FL Continues work on the essential elements of French language and aspects of 
culture. Aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing activities receive equal attention. Requires work 



French (FRENCH) 719

in the language and computer laboratory. Classes conducted in French. Open only to students who have a SAT II 
French score no higher than 420-480, or who have studied French for no more than three years in high school. 
Four class meetings a week. Instructor: Tufts and staff. One course.
111. Intensive Elementary French. FL Covers the basic elementary French language curriculum (French 
101-102) in one semester. Not open to students who have studied French for more than two years pre-college. 
Practice in understanding, speaking, readings, and writing French, and an introduction to some aspects of 
French/francophone cultures. Computer, video, and audio laboratory work required. Eight class hours a week. 
Instructors: Tufts and staff. Two courses.
201. What Is Europe?. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Exploration of the idea of Europe as a political, moral, and cultural 
identity. Examines the construction of such identity throughout history, ending with today’s European Union, at 
a moment in which integration of “Eastern” countries such as Turkey or Russia remains a hotly debated issue. 
Consistent attention devoted to literary, cinematic and artistic works which attempt to imagine a European 
Culture, as well as the evolution of aesthetics, and literary and art history. Instructor: Dainotto or staff. One 
course. C-L: Romance Studies 201, Italian 201, Literature 273, International Comparative Studies 240
203. Intermediate French Language and Culture. CZ, FL The first half of the two-semester program of 
intermediate French. Review of basic grammar; introduction to second language reading as a process; emphasis 
on understanding the cultural implication of written and visual texts; guided writing practice. Resources include 
audiotapes, computer tutorials, and videotapes. Prerequisite: French 102 or 111 at Duke, or SAT II score of 490-
580, or AP Language Test score of 3 in French. Instructors: Tufts and staff. One course.
204. Advanced Intermediate French Language and Culture. CZ, FL This advanced intermediate 
French course focuses on developing more sophisticated interpersonal, interpretive, presentational, 
and intercultural communication skills. As the semester progresses, you will learn skills in interpreting 
cinematographic and literary works and gain confidence in your French as you review grammar and vocabulary 
and learn to express yourselves and understand others in increasingly complex and abstract ways. Guided essay 
writing on topics related to the readings and discussion. Recommended prerequisite: French 203 at Duke, or 
SAT II score of 590-630, or an AP Language Test score of 4. Instructors: Florand and staff. One course.
212A. Intensive Intermediate French Language and Culture. CZ, FL This Duke in Aix-en-Provence 
course covers the intermediate French language curriculum (French 203, 204). Increased attention to 
grammatical variety and accuracy; guided writing practice; development of second language reading skill with 
increasing emphasis on critical analysis of cultural and literary texts. Resources include excerpts of nonfiction 
and literary texts, workshops with guest speakers, grammar and vocabulary supplements. Meets twelve hours/
week, plus weekly all-day excursions conducted in French. Prerequisite: French 101-102 or 111 at Duke, or 
consent of director of language program. Satisfies 2 course requirements for French majors, 1 for minors. 
Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
268. Art & Architecture in Early Modern France. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 268; 
also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 245
270T-3. Voices in Global Health: French Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Global Health 270T-3
272T. Voices in the Environment: French. Half course. C-L: see Environment 269T-2
275T-2. Voices in Cultural Anthropology: Advertising in French. Half course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 275T-2
290A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Topics in French Studies. Topics in French language, 
literature, and/or culture. Offered as part of a Duke Administered Global Education program. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
301S. Advanced French Writing and Grammar. CCI, FL, W Development of written expression in 
French, with special emphasis on stylistic variations, lexical nuances, and complex grammatical structures. 
Practice of different forms of French rhetoric and different styles in creative, argumentative, and analytical 
writings through literary, journalistic, and philosophical texts. Revision and rewriting, with focus on in-class 
analysis and critique and individual conferences. Thematic focus of the course varies according to semester. 
Recommended prerequisite: French 204, or AP Language Test score of 5, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.



 French (FRENCH)720

302S. Cultural and Literary Perspectives. CCI, FL, W Designed to give students leaving intermediate 
French the reading and writing skills necessary to enter mid-300 level courses in French studies. Examines 
the (re-)negotiation of the French identity through a series of texts and films that introduce students to 
contemporary Francophone thought. Topics include cultural practices, collective myths, sociolinguistics, and 
immigration. Recommended prerequisite: French 204. Not open to students who have received a 5 on the AP 
French Language and Culture Exam. Instructor: Staff. One course.
303S. French for Current Affairs. CCI, FL Contemporary culture/civilization course on changes/
controversies in France today. Sources from French media (press and TV). Current cultural, social, economic, 
political issues. Includes political institutions, media, religion, immigration, health and educational systems, 
foreign policy, France in the European Union. Equal emphasis on written/oral skills. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
304S. French Composition and Translation. CCI, FL, W Advanced translation and stylistics. Cultural 
and social difference between French and English patterns in written and oral expression. Extensive practice in 
translation of different types of texts. Equivalencies between French and English. Recommended prerequisite: 
French 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 304S
306S. Reading Literature in French. ALP, CCI, FL, W What is literature? Why read literature today? 
And how do we talk about what we read? This seminar offers an initiation to literature in French from the 
Enlightenment to the digital age. It introduces a wide range of critical and theoretical tools to study literature 
and its uses, and aims at developing writing and argumentation across a range of literary genres (theater, essay, 
novel, poetry...). This seminar explores how most urgent political and philosophical issues of the ages can be 
read through and unraveled within literary texts. Authors studied may include Montesquieu, Diderot, Balzac, 
Baudelaire, Flaubert, Sartre, Césaire, Michaux, Duras, Fanon, Perec, and Modiano. Instructor: Saliot. One 
course. C-L: Literature 306S
316S. Global Humanities in French. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, W For students with advanced or native French, 
a gateway to the French major focusing on global humanities in French. Key French-language humanistic 
cultural contributions as organized around comparative themes, regions, and eras. From Montesquieu’s 
Enlightenment Les Lettres persanes to Satrapi’s franco-Iranian graphic memoir Persepolis, the French to 
the Haitian Revolution, and African philosophy to French existentialism. Cultural objects including novels, 
films, poems, and paintings, as well as critical and historical writing—in digestible bites. Frequent, diverse 
writing assignments and group work. A foundation for lifelong cultural navigation/enrichment in French. 
Recommended prerequisite: native speaker status, AP French exam score of 5, or other advanced French 
preparation in secondary schooling. Instructor: Jenson. One course.
321S. Business and Culture in the Francophone World. CCI, FL Analyzes current socio-economic 
and cross-cultural issues to increase understanding of global marketplace. Focus on oral and written 
communication, business and economic practices, labor issues, case studies, and product marketing in the 
Francophone world. Prerequisite: one French course at the 300-level or instructor permission. Reserved for 
undergraduates. Graduate students should contact instructor for permission. Instructor: Reisinger. One course.
325S. Global Displacement: Voix Francophones. CCI, CZ, EI, FL, SS Explores migration and 
resettlement of Francophone refugees in North America through examination of current policy, law, and 
practice. Analysis of personal interviews and narratives with attention to ethical questions related to politics of 
listening to and speaking for other communities. Community-based language component (20 hours) engages 
students with refugee community in Durham. Conducted in French. Recommended prerequisite: one course at 
300-level or equivalent. Instructor: Reisinger. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 332S, Global 
Health 325S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 325S, Human Rights
327S. French for Freshmen and Sophomores. ALP, CCI, FL A literary, cross-cultural critique focusing 
on specific topics to be announced. Open only to first years and sophomores. Prerequisite: French 204, or SAT II 
score in French of 640 or higher, or AP score in French of 5. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
328SA. Marketing Québec: Policy, Marketing, and Identity. CCI, FL, R, SS Develop intercultural 
competencies focusing on regional, linguistic, and cultural factors contributing to Québec’s unique markets. 
Readings from texts and authentic cultural documents (policy, business journals, newspapers, audio and 
video reports). Active learning and teamwork-based projects to enhance critical thinking will form the basis 
of coursework. Assignments include a company portfolio, case study, and digital marketing project. Part of 



French (FRENCH) 721

the Duke in Montreal Program. Instructor: Reisinger. One course. C-L: Public Policy 337SA, Markets and 
Management Studies
329S. French Phonetics. FL Theory and practice of French pronunciation, corrective phonetics, intonation, 
accentuation, syllabification, elision and liaison. Focus on areas of speech production in French that are 
generally the most difficult for native speakers of English. Comprehension, dictation, and recitation exercises; 
interactive video and audio activities; self-assessment tasks; and end-of-term individual improvement grade. 
Instructor: Tufts. One course. C-L: Linguistics 302S
332. The French Short Story. ALP, CCI, FL The history of short fiction focusing on exemplary texts from 
various historical periods, beginning with the Middle Ages. Instructor: Solterer. One course.
335. Free Speech: France-USA. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, FL Critical history of free speech in France and the 
United States, from its beginnings to current controversies. Censorship by political and religious authorities; 
response of writers and readers. Readings of texts banned for heresy, obscenity, treason. “Causes célèbres” such 
as Rabelais, Voltaire, Beaumarchais, Sade. Instructor: Solterer. One course. C-L: Policy Journalism and Media 
Studies 335, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 335, Human Rights
337. French Scientists Write. ALP, CCI, FL Texts by pioneering French scientists in various historical 
periods: Descartes, Diderot, Claude Bernard, Henri Poincaré, François Jacob. No science prerequisites; not a 
technical course, but an exploration of the elegance and clarity of best scientific writing in France. Instructor: 
Bell. One course. C-L: Science & Society 337
339S. The Pleasure of Reading. ALP, CCI, FL Developing a level of reading proficiency in French 
comparable to one’s native language. Reading a variety of genres including works by French and francophone 
authors from mid-nineteenth to the twentieth-first century. Prerequisite: French 204 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Tufts or staff. One course.
340A. Sociology of Culture. CCI, CZ, FL Exploration of the imprecise notion of popular and mass culture—
globally as the interpretation of behavior, and locally, regionally, or nationally as the collective expression and 
rituals of a group: for example, hip hop, soccer, or business culture. Study of who produces culture, how it is 
disseminated, what are cultural practices today, and the relationship between political and cultural practices 
(Taught in Duke in France). Instructor: Staff. One course.
342A. The Creative Brain: Literature, Arts & Cognition. ALP, NS, STS Exploration of creativity 
and the relationships among literature, the visual and performing arts, cognition, and contemporary 
neuroscience. Literary and visual studies within a French context of perceptual knowledge, aesthetics, 
expectation, imagination, and social cognition. Close reading of literature and art in relation to progressive 
movements in Parisian society, and phenomenological studies of the cognitive processes involved in the 
creation and perception of visual and performing art forms. Instruction in English. Offered only in Duke in Paris 
Neurohumanities Program. Instructor: Jenson, Wardle. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 242A, Neuroscience 
242A, Visual and Media Studies 246A
343A. Advanced Expression. CCI, FL Intensive practice in speaking and writing. Offered only in the Duke 
in France Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
345A. Aspects of Contemporary French Culture. CCI, CZ, FL Cultural questions that are associated 
with contemporary France. French urbanism, mentalities, habits, and social rituals as they appear to be different 
from American practices. Topics to be announced. Offered only as part of the summer program in Paris. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
346AS. Aspects of French Literature. ALP, CCI, FL Concentration on single authors, genres, movements, 
or themes. Topics to be announced. Offered only as part of summer program in Paris. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
350A. Globalization and Deglobalization. FL, SS Multidisciplinary course provides students the 
necessary basics to understand current international economic issues, to understand the questing of the process 
of globalization but at the same time the difficulties of inversing this process. Taught in French through the Duke 
in France Program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 320A, Economics 320A, Public Policy 
356A, International Comparative Studies 363A
351A. The Economic and Political History of the European Union. CCI, CZ, FL, SS The idea in 



 French (FRENCH)722

the wake of WW II of a common Europe is still a long way from fulfilling its intended goals, with numerous 
challenges remaining. This multi-disciplinary course deciphers the complexities of the EU, predicts its future 
given its demographic, social and economic makeup, and analyzes the EU’s institutions and the way they 
function. It examines its agricultural and industrial policies as well as investigates its monetary and economic 
policies. From its original six members to today’s twenty-seven, the course addresses the question of the future 
of the EU, which in spite of multiple differences, has created a unique political and economic model. Taught 
at Duke in France. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Political Science 325A, Public Policy 351A, History 331A, 
Economics 330A
352A. From Enlightenment Culture to Popular Culture. CCI, FL, SS Course constructs a sociological 
history of French (and partially European) culture by routinely using the city of Paris as an example. Analyzes 
conflicts inherited by contemporary culture in highlighting major moments that have defined it since pre-
revolutionary era. Focuses on theoretical issues raised by each period, and the manner in which sociologists 
and critical theorists addressed them--from opposition of nature and culture just as it plays out for the pre-
romantics, to the criticism of mass-culture by post-modern theorists. Sessions will be chronological, and 
will introduce and cover principle problems of social sciences. Taught in French through the Duke in France 
Program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 352A, Sociology 252A
361. The French Love Story. ALP, CCI A history of the representation and social structuring of affective 
relationships in France, through close analysis of French novels and theory. Examine signification of love in the 
life, image and identity of the French from French perspective(s). Readings from classical texts (Plato), literary 
criticism (Rougemont and Girard), psychoanalysis (Freud, Lacan), and contemporary theory (Barthes); and the 
novels of Mme de LaFayette, Constant, Flaubert, Proust, Colette, and Duras. In English. Instructor: Longino. 
One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 208, Literature 262
361P. The French Love Story - Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
French 361. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Longino.
365. Paris: Capital of the Nineteenth Century. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL In the nineteenth century, Paris was 
recognized as a center of science, culture, and social thought, emblematic of the role the city was to play in 
new market economies where urban centers became the source of new ideas. This course will attempt to define 
what was special about Paris: how it was represented during the period, how it was transformed, and gained 
leadership in artistic and literary creation. Much of the course will be project based, with students contributing 
to curated, online presentations focusing on different aspects of Parisian life from urban architecture to public 
health, from new literary movements to new artistic movements, from fashion to food. Taught in French. 
Instructor: Bell. One course.
390. Topics in French Literature and Culture. FL Specific literary or cultural French or Francophone 
topics to be announced. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Topics in French Literature and Culture. Topics to be announced. (Offered only in the Duke-in-
France Program.) Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-1. Topics in French and/or Francophone Culture Abroad. Topics may vary. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390S. Topics in French Literature and Culture. FL Seminar on specific literary or cultural French or 
Francophone topics to be announced. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in French Literature and/or Culture (in English). Topics to be announced. 
Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See French 393. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
410S. Contemporary French Fiction. ALP, CCI, FL, W One course. C-L: see Literature 410S



French (FRENCH) 723

411. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, R History and art of the life story, 
examining biography as it drives research and contemporary writing. From Montaigne to Rousseau, the biopic 
to the lives of troubadours, we will study modes, media and social functions: portrait, caricature, meditation, 
fragments, selfies. The subjects: famous or anonymous people; those who are not human, landscapes, the sea—
even inanimate objects. The accounts of radical change or metamorphosis, personal epiphanies, self-conscious 
reflection. The aims of depicting lives as they unfold. Texts include Foucault, Augustine, Flora Tristan, Pascal, 
Ferraoun. Critical readings will be coupled with creative work culminating in a research project around your life. 
Instructor: Solterer. One course. C-L: Literature 420, History 420
412S. Laughing Through It All: French Comedy and Its Social/Political Contexts, Middle Ages to 
the 21st C. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Exploration of comedy, its nature, definitions, and functions within changing 
social and political contexts via close readings of plays representative of the richness and variety of French 
comedy from the Middle Ages to the 21st Century. Readings from theoretical and critical texts ranging from 
Aristotle to Bakhtin and beyond, Instructor: Tufts. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 421S
413. World War II and French Film. CCI, CZ, EI, FL Film scripts, memoirs, novels, political 
and social history, and cinematic technique that inform the viewing of French films on World War II. 
Possible films to be viewed: Clément’s Jeux interdits, Malle’s Au revoir les enfants and Lacombe Lucien, 
Miller’s L’accompagnatrice, Yanne’s Boulevard des hirondelles, and Lanzmann’s Shoah. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: History 295, Visual and Media Studies 310
414S. Comics and Culture: Images of Modern France in the Making. ALP, CCI, FL An investigation 
of the French comic strip over the last century from a historical, sociological, and technical perspective. Topics 
include political satire, Nazi propaganda, regional and national stereotypes, the role of women, and the influence 
of cinema and television. Readings include original works, interviews, critical articles, and related historical 
cultural, and technical studies. Instructor: Tufts. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 311S
415. Yesterday’s Classics/Today’s Movies. ALP, CCI, FL Films on the French classical era, readings 
of related texts, and film reviews. Analysis of themes/preoccupations from seventeenth century to today. The 
nature of classicism and its role in shaping of a French mentalité. Instructor: Longino. One course. C-L: Visual 
and Media Studies 312
416A. Modern and Contemporary Art in France. ALP, CCI, FL Based on the following five units: 
liberation from tradition, subversion and experimentation, art and society, the new methods and new places 
of art, and icons of the 20th century. On these premises, course will follow in chronological order, offering a 
panorama of principal movements in modern and contemporary art in France (Fauvism, Cubism, Dadaism, 
Surrealism, Neo-realism etc.) Goal of the sessions, based on specific works, will aim to re-enroll these 
movements in their artistic and social context. Three mandatory museum visits complement the course. Taught 
in French through Duke-in-France Program. Instructor: Staff. One course.
417S. Francophone Literature. ALP, CCI, FL Modern literature in French from French-speaking Africa 
and the French Caribbean. Topics include tradition and modernity; colonization, cultural assimilation, and the 
search for identity; and women in changing contexts. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern 
Studies 202S, History 387S, Latin American Studies
420S. De l’Horrible Danger de la Lecture / On the Terrible Danger of Reading. ALP, CCI, 
FL Voltaire’s short pamphlet, De l’horrible danger de la lecture, et autres Invitations à la Tolérance, serves as 
point of departure for this in-depth exploration of the act of reading, an act we take for granted in daily life but 
that engages us in complex mental operations involving our imagination and memory, as well as deductive and 
critical faculties. Instructor: Longino. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 420S
425S. Surrealism: Aesthetics and Politics. ALP, FL, R Introduces basic principles and central issues of 
Surrealism investigating its relations with modernism. Examines Surrealist strategies (automatism, hypnosis, 
collage, found objects), themes (dreams, sexuality, dépaysement), and political agendas (Marxism, anti-
colonialism, anarchism) across a wide range of verbal sources and visual artefacts and from a variety of angles: 
its precursors (Sade, Freud, Apollinaire), the practices in the Parisian scene in the 1920s, the European anti-
fascist phase, reception of Parisian surrealism in the Caribbean, theoretical reflections by Benjamin and Adorno, 
the legacies (The Situationist International, May 1968, Pop Art). Conducted in French. Instructor: Saliot. One 
course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 425S



 French (FRENCH)724

426S. France-Asia: Cultural Transfers and Translations in a Globalized Context. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
FL, W This class explores the dynamic contemporary Franco-Asian dialogue with a specific focus on China, 
Japan, Vietnam, Laos and Cambodia. Seeking to go beyond the East-West divide, the seminar investigates the 
current stakes of this dialogue, given its growing complexity after 1945. It examines the postcolonial legacy 
of France’s occupation of Indochina, and how East Asia has also often been viewed as an “Other,” serving 
to crystallize French anxieties over political and cultural power. It uses an interdisciplinary perspective 
encompassing novels, cinema, dance, visual arts, and critical theory to trace a web of exchanges in a globalized 
context. Instructor: Saliot. One course. C-L: Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 426S, International Comparative 
Studies 413S, Literature 426S
427S. Banlieues and Peripheries in French Contemporary Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, FL, W This seminar explores figurations of banlieues and peripheries in contemporary French literature 
and cinema, and how they are inherently intertwined with a deep renewal of realist aesthetics. We will study 
the recent tendency to approach margins as metonymic and conflicted geopolitical configurations, articulating 
issues of gender, class and race. We will examine a constellation of recent films and narratives that can be 
anticipatory and expressive of the French social discontent in all its complexity, from the banlieues riots to the 
yellow vest movement. Instructor: Saliot. One course. C-L: Literature 427S
429. Imagining Europe: Arts, Culture, Politics. ALP, CCI, CZ Investigation of defining debates on 
European culture and the fiction which shapes them. In collaboration with Nasher Museum. Focus on literature 
and the visual arts of France, Italy, Portugal, Spain. Comparative analysis of key issues, including arts of 
migration, multilingualism, cultural and political relations within and without Europe, development of financial 
systems. Major authors: Marco Polo, Khatibi, Montaigne, Montesquieu, Balzac, Calvino, Némirovsky, Semprún, 
Saramago. Research in museum collections on major pieces. Instructor: Solterer, staff, with Nasher staff. One 
course. C-L: Romance Studies 202, Literature 274, Art History 202, Visual and Media Studies 202
429P. Imagining Europe: Language, Culture, Politics Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, 
requiring concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 202 or French 429. Further information available from 
instructor. Instructor: Solterer, staff. C-L: Romance Studies 202P
481. Flaubert’s Brain: Neurohumanities. ALP, CCI, STS Consideration of `realist’ fiction of Gustave 
Flaubert from social and cognitive neuroscience perspective. Investigation of implications of Flaubert’s 
illustration of cognitive, affective, and somatic experiences of his characters, and his own experience, e.g. lapses 
of consciousness, convulsions, heightened emotions. Use of digital resources to chart emerging discourses 
and patterns in documentation of neuropathology, while attempting to define unique properties of fiction as 
literary “technology”, e.g. by consideration of realist mimesis as analogous to mapping and other technologies 
documenting brain function/dysfunction. A preceptorial may be available for French majors/minors. Instructor: 
Jenson. One course. C-L: Literature 246, Neuroscience 241
481P. Flaubert’s Brain: Neurohumanities Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in French 481. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Jenson.
482S. Strange Masterpieces: Major Authors in French and Francophone Modernity. ALP, CCI, 
FL Introduction to the work of major authors from the eighteenth through twentieth centuries in the French 
language tradition. Topics include literary movements and their relationships to political, economic, or other 
social contexts; authorial personae and roles; print culture and its relation to nations, diasporas, and other social 
collectivities; narratology; and gender and literature. Instructor: Garreta or staff. One course. C-L: Literature 
416S
489S. Screening Europe. ALP, CCI, CZ Course debates identification of Europe as a political, historical and 
social entity from the standpoint of cinema. Provides students with an introduction to the notion of “European 
cinema” from 1945 to the present-day crisis of Brexit and migration. Explores issues concerning interactions 
and relations between national and transnational identities, the local and the global, post-colonialism and 
multiculturalism, migration and nationalism, and Eastern versus Western Europe. Instructor: Saliot. One 
course. C-L: Romance Studies 489S, International Comparative Studies 479S, Literature 489S, Visual and 
Media Studies 489S
489SP. Screening Europe Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
Romance Studies 489S or French 489S. For French minors and majors, and all students who want to improve 
their linguistic skills. Students lead class discussions in French, write all their assignments in French and give an 



French (FRENCH) 725

oral presentation in French. Further information available from the instructor. Instructor: Saliot. C-L: Romance 
Studies 489SP
490-1. Topics in Literature and Neuroscience. Focus on the intersection of literature, culture and 
neuroscience. Topics vary. Taught in English with French preceptorial available. Instructor: Jenson or staff. One 
course. C-L: Neuroscience 290-1
490A. Advanced Topics in French and/or Francophone Literature/Culture Abroad. Topics may 
vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in French Literature. FL A cross-cultural analysis focusing on specific literary or 
cultural French or Francophone topics to be announced. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R See French 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See French 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Honors Thesis. R Preparation and writing of research paper for “departmental distinction.” Consent 
of both the instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. See section on honors in Bulletin. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
506. Contemporary French Extreme Fiction. ALP, CCI, FL Contemporary innovations and new models 
of narration at beginning of the twenty-first century. May include the autoportrait (Leiris, Perec, Roubaud), the 
documentary (Bon, Kuperman, Bergougnioux, Houellebecq), and the minimalist school (Chevillard, Echenoz, 
Deville, Lenoir). Instructor: Staff. One course.
507S. Mimesis in Theory, Embodied Practice, and Literary Arts. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Theoretical 
exploration of mimesis from Plato and Aristotle to Tarde, Lacan, Girard, Rancière, Lacoue-Labarthe, Butler, 
Malabou, Cassin, and Latoo. Additional emphasis on mimesis in human and animal development and social/
behavioral practice, with interdisciplinary intertexts from fields ranging from neuroscience to genomics. 
Frequent departures from paradigmatic and empirical evidence to revel in the sensory and intuitive renewal of 
literary/artistic mimetic agency and apperception. Course taught in French, with occasional sources in English. 
Flexible language of assignments and English discussion section for graduate students outside of the French 
field. Instructor: Jenson. One course. C-L: Art History 509S, English 581S, Literature 507S
510. Citizen Godard. ALP, CCI, W This course explores the complex interactions of poetics and politics 
in the films of Jean-Luc Godard, from the French New Wave, through the experimental phase of the Dziga 
Vertov group, to the recent Histoire(s) du cinéma and Film socialisme. Drawing on a wide range of literary and 
philosophical texts (Merleau-Ponty, Althusser, Deleuze, Rancière), this seminar situates Godard’s work within 
its intellectual and political contexts, investigating how developments in French culture and thought since 1950 
have been reflected in—and sometimes anticipated by—Godard’s films. In English with preceptorial available in 
French. Instructor: Saliot. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 552, Literature 510
510P. Citizen Godard Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent enrollment in French 
510. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Saliot.
512. Structure of French. FL Modern French phonology, morphology and syntax. Pragmatic interpretation 
of the current modes of use, including language levels, situationism, and interrelations. Readings in current 
linguistic theory. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 512
525S. Moliere: The Phenomenon of Laughter. ALP, CCI, FL Study of laughter as human reflex (what 
makes us laugh), and social critique (why and when), in the context of the Classical Age and through the comedy 
of Molière. Instructor: Longino. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 521S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 601S
530. Medieval Fictions. ALP, CCI, FL Premodern Times: A User’s Manual. Introduction to the earliest 
languages, literatures, and cultures in France and across Europe. Topics include orality and literacy, the 
experience of allegory, fictionality, the modern uses of the past. Major writers include the inventor of romance, 
Chrétien de Troyes, Provencal troubadours and trouvères, Guillaume de Machaut, the first professional writer, 
Christine de Pizan and Alain Chartier. Instructor: Solterer. 3 units. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 642, Literature 541



 French (FRENCH)726

531. Imagining Community in Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan. ALP, CCI, CZ This comparative 
seminar explores the controversial and complex works of Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan. Boccaccio, 
illegitimate, impoverished son of a Florentine banker, and Christine de Pizan, an Italian woman isolated at 
court in Paris during a civil war both use literary form to construct communities—local, linguistic, national, 
intellectual, gendered, universal. This seminar attempts a different conception of literary community beyond 
national types and hierarchies offering students opportunities to explore their works and modern critical 
debates about them. All works available in translation. Readings in original languages and preceptorial meetings 
for majors and graduate students. Instructor: Eisner or Solterer. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 530, Italian 
531
531P. Imagining Community in Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan Preceptorial. A preceptorial in 
French or Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 530, French 531, or Italian 531. Further 
information available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner or Solterer. C-L: Romance Studies 530P, Italian 531P
535S. L’age classique et la loi du genre. ALP, CCI, FL Rules governing French literary production and 
dictating standards for specific genres developed in the 17th century under the guidance of the newly formed 
Académie française and the influence of a number of self-designated arbiters of taste. In this introduction to 
French classical literature, students will gain a firm grounding in the canon, read critical theory, and explore 
different approaches to the question of genre. Readings drawn from a wide variety of contemporary genres and 
from recent criticism relating to the question of genre. Instructor: Longino. One course.
556. Modern Literature and History. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL The interaction of history and literature in a 
particular period, for example: the occupation of France, the French Revolution. Problems of interpretation, 
historical memory, social identity, and narrative. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 587
557. Cultural Memory. ALP, CCI, R, W Investigates invention, reconfiguration, and use of literary fictions 
over time. Examines major theoretical models: Assmann on cultural memory; LeGoff on history vs. memory; 
Rancière, Agamben on Temporality and anachrony; Benjamin, Bon on media and transmission. Readings from 
modern, premodern, and contemporary fiction, crossing genres and modes—narrative, poetic, dramatic, verbal, 
pictorial, cinematographic (including e.g. Hugo, Villon, Glissant, troubadour poetry, Aragon, Pichette, Christine 
de Pizan, Dreyer, Artaud, Bernard, Lamartine, Chartier, Lurçat, the Bayeux tapestry). Research projects to be 
developed with collaborators at European universities and archives. Taught in English. Instructor: Solterer. One 
course. C-L: History 557, Literature 557
557P. Cultural Memory Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in French, requiring concurrent enrollment in French 
557. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Solterer.
571. French Symbolism. ALP, EI, FL Poetry and literary theories of Baudelaire, Rimbaud, Mallarmé. 
Writings of Laforgue, Lautréamont, Huysmans, Louys, and others as they define new aesthetical and ethical 
values in the framework of the Symbolist and the Decadent intellectual movements. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
572. Paradigms of Modern Thought. ALP, FL, R An introduction to contemporary French philosophy 
and thought with a focus on identity and difference, truth and falsehood in enunciation, globalization and 
nationalism. Research work in French. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590. Special Topics in French Literature. A cross-cultural analysis focusing on specific literary or cultural 
French or Francophone topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Seminar in French Literature. Cross-cultural analysis of literary and cultural topics focusing on 
specific objects of inquiry. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
611. Biography, Life Writing, Autofiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, R History and art of the life story, 
examining biography as it drives research and contemporary writing. From Montaigne to Rousseau, the biopic 
to the lives of troubadours, we will study modes, media and social functions: portrait, caricature, meditation, 
fragments, selfies. The subjects: famous or anonymous people; those who are not human, landscapes, the sea—
even inanimate objects. The accounts of radical change or metamorphosis, personal epiphanies, self-conscious 
reflection. The aims of depicting lives as they unfold. Texts include Foucault, Augustine, Flora Tristan, Pascal, 
Ferraoun. Critical readings will be coupled with creative work culminating in a research project around your 
life. Same course as French 411 but with additional graduate-level work. Instructor: Solterer. One course. C-L: 
History 611, Literature 609



Italian (ITALIAN)  727

690-1. Topics in French Literature of the Eighteenth Century. FL Close study of a particular author, 
genre, or interpretive category of Enlightenment literature. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-2. Topics in French Literature of the Modern Era. Close study of a particular author, genre, or 
interpretive category of the twentieth century. May include issues such as authorship, translation, reception or 
critical theory. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S-2. Topics in French Literature of the Modern Era. Close study of a particular author, genre, 
or interpretive category of the 20th century. May include issues such as authorship, translation, reception or 
critical theory. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Italian

Courses in Italian (ITALIAN) 
89S. First Year Seminar in Italian. Topics vary each semester offered. This course is restricted to first-year 
students. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Elementary Italian 1. FL Introduction to the basic elements of Italian language and culture. Equal 
attention to aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Conducted in Italian. Not open to students 
with prior knowledge of Italian. Four class meetings a week. Instructor: Fellin and staff. One course.
101A. Italian for Beginners. FL Practice in understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. (Taught in Duke-
administered programs in Italy.) Placement tests administered to returning students intending to continue in 
Italian language studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Elementary Italian 2. FL Italian 102 develops and expands elements acquired in Italian 101: aural 
comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing. Conducted in Italian. Four class meetings a week. Prerequisite: 
Italian 101 or placement through the Director of the Italian Language Program. Instructor: Fellin and staff. One 
course.
112. Accelerated Elementary Italian. FL Covers the elementary Italian Language curriculum (Italian 
101-102) in one semester. Development of understanding, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Introduction to 
aspects of Italian life and culture. Four class meetings a week. Instructors: Fellin and staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Topics in Italian Literature and Culture. Topics on single authors, genres, movements, 
or themes across centuries. Taught in English. Topics course. Open only to students in the Focus program. 
Instructor: Finucci. One course.
201. What Is Europe?. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Exploration of the idea of Europe as a political, moral, and cultural 
identity. Examines the construction of such identity throughout history, ending with today’s European Union, at 
a moment in which integration of “Eastern” countries such as Turkey or Russia remains a hotly debated issue. 
Consistent attention devoted to literary, cinematic and artistic works which attempt to imagine a European 
Culture, as well as the evolution of aesthetics, and literary and art history. Instructor: Dainotto or staff. One 
course. C-L: Romance Studies 201, French 201, Literature 273, International Comparative Studies 240
203. Intermediate Italian. CZ, FL Content-based approach focusing on aspects of Italian culture and 
contemporary society. Focus on the development of second language reading skills; review of grammar; practice 
in understanding, speaking and writing. Literary and cultural texts taken from a variety of media. Instructors: 
Fellin and staff. One course.
204. Advanced Intermediate Italian. ALP, CZ, FL Further development of the elements practiced in 
Italian 101-203. Increased attention to grammatical accuracy and vocabulary development; guided writing 
practice and development of second language reading skills. Prepares students for 300 level Italian courses. 
Includes analysis of cultural and literary texts. One course.
213A. Accelerated Intermediate Italian. CZ, FL Covers the intermediate Italian Language curriculum 
(Italian 203 and 204) in one semester. Attention to vocabulary development and grammatical accuracy. Writing 
practice and development of reading skills with emphasis on analysis of cultural and literary texts. Prepares 
students to enroll in courses at the 300 level. Four class meetings a week. Prerequisite: Italian 112 or consent of 
the Italian Language Director. Offered through the Duke in Bologna program. Instructor: Fellin and staff. One 
course.



 Italian (ITALIAN) 728

220. Modern European Short Fiction. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Comprehensive examination of several 
important works of modern European short fiction by authors such as Kafka, Woolf, Svevo, Sartre, Joyce, 
Proust, Mann, Schnitzler, Gogol, and Calvino. While stories will be contextualized historically, culturally, and 
geographically, course is organized into thematic units, including animals, home, punishment, and love, to 
facilitate comparative analysis. Students engage critically with concepts such as identity, trauma, genre, and 
narrative form. No prerequisites. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 206, German 243, 
Literature 244, English 244, Jewish Studies 243, International Comparative Studies 212
220P. Modern European Short Fiction Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 206 or Italian 220. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Ziolkowski. C-L: Romance Studies 206P
225. The Problem of Love in Western Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Love causes problems. It can 
inspire passion or madness; foster alliances, destroy friendships, provoke war, broker peace. It impacts 
communities and raises fundamental questions about life. Exploring amorous discourse from two millennia 
–Plato’s erotic ascent, Virgil’s deceived Dido, Ovid’s rules of seduction, Boccaccio’s legitimation of female 
desire, Michelangelo’s homoerotic poetry, Leonardo’s sublimated impulses, Foscolo’s tragic obsession, comic 
uncertainties of Svevo’s modern lovers, and love from afar in Montale—we will see what changes, what persists, 
and ultimately come to understand what we mean when we talk about love today. Instructor: Eisner. One 
course. C-L: Romance Studies 205, Literature 205, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 304
225P. The Problem of Love in Western Literature - Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 205 or Italian 225. Further information available from instructor. 
Instructor: Eisner. C-L: Romance Studies 205P
256. Italian Baroque Art. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 256; also C-L: Romance Studies 
256, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 246
258. Renaissance Architecture in Italy: Brunelleschi to Michelangelo. ALP, CZ One course. C-L: see 
Art History 258; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 227
261. Michelangelo in Context. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 259; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 233
290A-1. Special Topics in Italian Language, Literature, or Culture. Topics in Italian language, 
literature or culture. Offered in Duke in Venice. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301S. Introduction to Italian Studies: Language, Literature, Film. ALP, CCI, FL, W Introduction 
to Italian literature, thought and cultural practices. Focus on one or more authors, genres, social and political 
movements, cultural institutions, from middle ages to present, exposing students to a range of critical and 
theoretical tools. Engagement with social, political and philosophical issues and debates of enduring importance 
within literary and cultural texts and traditions. Strong emphasis on development of composition skills, writing 
and discourse strategies, vocabulary development, rhetorical techniques and conventions. Prerequisite: Italian 
204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302A. Italy 21st Century: Understanding Contemporary Italy Through Media, Film, and 
Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Designed to enrich students’ knowledge and understanding of contemporary 
Italian society and culture and to enhance their communicative skills and ability to comprehend more complex 
written texts and spoken language. The course examines various aspects of modern and contemporary Italian 
culture through the discussion of a variety of print and non-print materials: literary, journalistic and cinematic 
texts on contemporary Italian society, politics and culture. Offered at the Duke in Venice Program. Prerequisite: 
Italian 204, its equivalent or above. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302S. Italian Conversations: Explore Italy and Italians through Media, Film, Literature. ALP, 
CCI, CZ, FL A high-intermediate/advanced language course designed for students who wish to learn about 
contemporary Italy and improve their conversation skills, including their listening and speaking competencies 
and pragmatic sensibilities. The aim of this course is to develop students’ ability to participate in culturally 
nuanced discussions, successfully negotiate transactions and gain greater confidence in giving presentations. 
Emphasis on discussion of cultural topics explored through film, media and news, and specific student interests. 
Recommended prerequisite: Italian 204 or above. Instructor: Fellin and staff. One course.



Italian (ITALIAN)  729

303S. Italian Sociolinguistics. CCI, CZ, FL, SS Linguistic diversity in modern Italy. Social and geographic 
language variation, multilingualism, and the relationship between language and dialect. Special codes, including 
youth slang, language and politics, language and bureaucracy. Discussion of language and gender, language and 
racism, linguistic etiquette within Italian society. Instructor: Fellin. One course. C-L: Linguistics 305S
327S. Introduction to Italian Culture. ALP, CCI, FL An introduction to Italian culture through the cross-
cultural analysis of its history, literature, cinema and arts. Instructor: Staff. One course.
328S. Italian Studies Seminar. ALP, CCI An introduction to Italian culture through the cross-cultural 
analysis of its history, literature, cinema and arts. Through readings and discussions of primary and secondary 
texts, students will encounter and examine a range of Italian cultural topics. The course may be organized 
around a theme, like revolution, postcolonialism, or feminism in the Renaissance. Students will consider the 
topic from an Italian perspective, developing a greater understanding of both the theme and Italian society, 
culture, literature, and film. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
332. Introduction to Italian Literature I. ALP, CCI, FL Major writers of the Italian premodern literary 
tradition of the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth centuries. Poetry, fiction, theater, and essay. Instructor: 
Eisner. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 312
335. Major Italian Authors. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Textual studies of the most important authors of the Italian 
literary tradition. Authors may vary. At times the course devoted to single author: Dante, Boccaccio, Pirandello; 
or, two or three authors studies together in the context of the culture of their time or of their influence on 
subsequent centuries or authors: Petrarch and Petrarchist phenomenon of the sixteenth century, Morante and 
the historical novel, Machiavelli and Vico. Not open to students who have taken this course as Italian 165S. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
337. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema. ALP, CCI, EI, W This course explores the 
portrayals of America, especially the United States, from authors and directors who are not American and who 
often have never even seen America. We will read short stories, novels, and graphic novels and watch films. 
What do these works from other parts of the world have to say about dreams, race, love, immigration, and space 
in America? We will discuss imaginary Americas in order to understand these important works within their 
contexts, to examine how foreign representations of America have contributed to our idea of America, and to 
consider what imagined Americas suggest about us here in North Carolina. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One course. 
C-L: Romance Studies 337, English 237, Jewish Studies 337, Literature 337
337P. America from Abroad: Literature and Cinema Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 337S or Italian 337S. Further information available from instructor. 
Instructor: Ziolkowski. C-L: Romance Studies 337P
340A. Aspects of Italian Literature. ALP, CCI Concentration on single authors, periods, genres, regions, 
or themes. (Taught in Italy.) Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
342A. Dante and the Art of Hell. ALP, CZ, R Dante’s Divine Comedy, has inspired medieval illuminations, 
Renaissance frescoes, Surrealist paintings, and modern sculptures. This course explores this remarkable visual 
history to interpret Dante’s poem. What new features of Dante’s world do these visual adaptations bring into 
focus? Visiting sites throughout Italy, we will also aim to reconstruct Dante’s visual and built environment to 
understand what is distinctive about his vision. Taught in English. Offered through Duke in Venice and Duke 
in Bologna programs. Instructor: Eisner. One course. C-L: Art History 342A, Literature 342A, Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 342A
350S. Italian Migration Stories. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL This course examines Italian literature that portrays 
and reflects on migration. We will read a range of authors who wrote in Italian but were often born elsewhere, 
including in Togo, Hungary, China, Egypt, India, and Somalia. We will discuss the multiple identities of Italian 
migrants and how they navigate between where they lived and their life in Italy. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One 
course.
379S. The Detective Novel. ALP, CZ What is a detective novel, and how does it “work”? By looking at 
synchronic and diachronic transformations of the genre—from British Sherlock Holmes to the South African 
“noir-fantastic”—the course investigates the structure of literary genres and their adaptability to different social, 
cultural, and civilizational contexts. The course has no prerequisites and is designed for majors and minors in 
Romance Studies and the humanities in general. Instructor: Dainotto. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 379S, 



 Italian (ITALIAN) 730

English 376S, Literature 379S
379SP. The Detective Novel Preceptorial in Italian. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 379S or Italian 379S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Dainotto. C-L: Romance Studies 379SP
380. Italian Cinema. ALP, CCI Introduction course to Italian cinema including silent films, Neorealism, 
fascist productions, Commedia all’italiana and experimentalism. Reading and discussions in English. Instructor: 
Dainotto and staff. One course. C-L: Literature 215, Visual and Media Studies 308, Theater Studies 276
380P. Italian Cinema - Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in Italian 
380. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto.
383. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ Aspects of social, literary, and cultural history of the Italian 
cities Venice, Florence, Rome, or Milan from the middle ages to the early modern period, as anchors of larger 
geographical areas, or famed artistic centers. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 237, 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 343, Cultural Anthropology 383
383A. Cities and City Life in Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ Aspects of social, literary, and cultural history of the 
Italian cities Venice, Florence, Rome, or Milan from the middle ages to the early modern period, as anchors 
of larger geographical areas, or famed artistic centers. Taught in English. Offered through Duke in Venice 
program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: History 237A, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 343A, Cultural 
Anthropology 383A
383P. City and City Life in Italy, Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment 
in Italian 383. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Finucci.
384. European Art 1900-1945. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 280; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 281
385. Mafia at the Movies. ALP, CCI A study of the mafia, and by extension, of Italy’s “dark heart,” in its 
historical, social, economic, cultural, and political dimensions, as represented in a wide range of Italian and 
American films and television productions, from documentary to comedy. Course will also consider possibilities 
and limits inherent to cinema in representing, and influencing cultural and social realities. In English with 
preceptorial for Italian majors or minors, or others desiring additional assignments and discussion in Italian. 
Instructor: Dainotto. One course. C-L: Literature 385, Visual and Media Studies 385, Theater Studies 375
385P. Mafia at the Movies Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
Italian 385. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto.
386. Art in Renaissance Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 255; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 225
386FS. Art in Renaissance Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 255FS; also C-L: Medieval 
and Renaissance Studies 225FS
388S. Food, Culture, and Society. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This DukeImmerse course provides a broad overview 
of food as culture and its role in society. Exploration of the intersections between food and identity from gender, 
ethnic, class, religious, and political identities to how people use food to develop a sense of themselves as ethical 
beings. Food and democracy and food activism. Readings from anthropological, sociological, linguistic, and 
literary writings with ethnographic observations in local communities of practice. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Fellin. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 388S, Cultural Anthropology 389S, Sociology 388S
390. Topics in Italian Civilization. A cross-cultural study of Italy through history, culture, people, and 
institutions. Topics may vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Topics in Italian Literature and Culture. ALP, FL Topics to be announced. Offered to students 
enrolled in Duke approved courses in Italy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-1. Special Topics in Italian Language, Literature or Culture. Topics in Italian language, 
literature or culture. Offered through Duke in Venice. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390P. Topics in Italian Civilization: Preceptorial. Preceptorial attached to Italian 390. Please see 
instructor for more information. Instructor: Staff.



Italian (ITALIAN)  731

390S. Special Topics in Italian Studies. A cross-cultural study of Italy through history, culture, people, and 
institutions. Topics may vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SA. Topics in Italian Studies. A cross-cultural study of Italy through history, culture, people, and 
institutions. Topics may vary each semester. For Study Abroad and Duke Intense Global students only. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
390SP. Topics in Italian Studies: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment 
in Italian 390S. See instructor for further details. Instructor: Staff.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Italian 393. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
479S. Dante at Duke and in the World. CCI, CZ, R This course investigates Dante’s presence at Duke and 
in the World, paying particular attention to his extraordinary Anglophone reception especially at Duke. Students 
will collaborate to create a library exhibit that shares their discoveries. Instructor: Eisner. One course. C-L: 
Literature 479S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 474S
479SP. Dante at Duke and in the World Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Italian 479S. Additional information available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner.
481. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI A voyage through the 
three otherworldly places of Dante’s philosophical poem (Hell, Purgatory, Paradise) whose transformation of 
human actions into an ordered ethical system continues to captivate readers. Instructor: Eisner. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 450, Religion 262, Literature 245, History 253
481P. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise: Preceptorial. A preceptorial requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Italian 481. Additional information available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner.
482SA. Sex, Death, and a Little Love: Boccaccio’s Decameron. ALP, CCI, CZ, R Ten Florentines, 
in the Plague’s shadow, telling a hundred stories about human relationships, wit, religion, tragedy, happiness, 
and the power of language. For Duke in Bologna or Duke Intense Global students only. Instructor: Eisner. One 
course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 454SA, Literature 482SA
483. What Machiavelli Really Says. ALP, CZ, EI, R Everyone knows what “Machiavellian” means, but 
what does Machiavelli really say? Reading his classical political texts, “The Prince,” the “Discourses on Livy,” 
and “The Art of War” in the company of his literary works, including “Mandragola,” we will examine how 
Machiavelli’s ideas about power, deception, language, ethics, and representation emerged from his reading 
of Plato, Livy, Ovid, and Dante, while also exploring the reception and consequences of his ideas. Just as 
Machiavelli searched history for answers to his own political situation, our guiding question cannot help but be 
“What would Machiavelli do?” Instructor: Eisner. One course. C-L: History 405, Literature 483, Political Science 
483, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 473
490A. Topics in Italian Literature and Culture Abroad. Topics to be announced. Offered to students 
enrolled in Duke Study Abroad in Italy. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Advanced Topics in Italian Literature and Culture. Topics may include: the Enlightenment, 
romanticism, modernism, avant-garde. Taught in English. Instructor: Dainotto, Eisner, Finucci, or Hardt. One 
course.
490SP. Topics in Modern Literature and Culture, Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Italian 490S. Further informaiton available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner, 
Dainotto, Finucci, or Hardt.
493. Research Independent Study. R See Italian 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Italian 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Italian (ITALIAN) 732

495. Honors Thesis. R Preparation and writing of research paper for “departmental distinction.” Consent 
of both the instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. See section on honors in Bulletin. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
531. Imagining Community in Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan. ALP, CCI, CZ This comparative 
seminar explores the controversial and complex works of Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan. Boccaccio, 
illegitimate, impoverished son of a Florentine banker, and Christine de Pizan, an Italian woman isolated at 
court in Paris during a civil war both use literary form to construct communities—local, linguistic, national, 
intellectual, gendered, universal. This seminar attempts a different conception of literary community beyond 
national types and hierarchies offering students opportunities to explore their works and modern critical 
debates about them. All works available in translation. Readings in original languages and preceptorial meetings 
for majors and graduate students. Instructor: Eisner or Solterer. One course. C-L: Romance Studies 530, French 
531
531P. Imagining Community in Boccaccio and Christine de Pizan Preceptorial. A preceptorial in 
French or Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in Romance Studies 530, French 531, or Italian 531. Further 
information available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner or Solterer. C-L: Romance Studies 530P, French 531P
532S. Comparative Modernisms. ALP, CCI, R This course investigates the debated term modernism. 
We will explore a wide range of critical works on periodization, avant-garde movements, irony, stream of 
consciousness, and other key terms, to examine several major literary works of modernism, including selections 
from Woolf, Rilke, Marinetti, Pirandello, Musil, Joyce, and Kafka. Each student will select a representative work 
from a national literary tradition to contextualize for the class and research. Instructor: Ziolkowski. One course. 
C-L: Romance Studies 532S, Literature 532S, German 535S
532SP. Comparative Modernisms Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 532S or Italian 532S. Enrollment allows the course to count toward the 
language requirement for the Italian major or minor. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: 
Ziolkowski. C-L: Romance Studies 532SP
581S. Italian Linguistics. ALP, CCI, SS An interdisciplinary study of selected topics, such as history of 
linguistic theories and language ideologies. Language state formation and citizenship in Italy. Language and 
power, language and identity. Taught in English. Instructor: Fellin. One course.
581SP. Italian Linguistics: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
Italian 581S. Further information available from instructor: Instructor: Fellin.
582. Dante’s Divine Comedy: Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI A voyage through the 
three otherworldly places of Dante’s philosophical poem (Hell, Purgatory, Paradise) whose transformation of 
human actions into an ordered ethical system continues to captivate readers. Same as Italian 481/Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 450/Literature 245 but with additional graduate level work. Instructor: Eisner. One course. 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 603, Literature 582
582P. Dante’s Divine Comedy - Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise: Preceptorial. A preceptorial requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Italian 582. Instructor: Eisner.
583S. Dante Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ Focus on a particular aspect of Dante’s work. Taught in English. 
Instructor: Eisner. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 615S, Literature 583S
583SP. Dante Studies: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in Italian 
583S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Eisner.
584S. Boccaccio Studies. ALP, CCI, R Examines a particular aspect of Boccaccio’s works, such as the 
Decameron. Issues may include Boccaccio’s role in the construction of a vernacular literary community, his 
place in the history of literary criticism, his investigations of gender, or his relationship to the larger storytelling 
traditions. Taught in English with an Italian preceptorial available for majors or minors. Instructor: Eisner. One 
course. C-L: Literature 584S, Medieval and Renaissance Studies 618S
585S. Topics in Sexuality and Gender Studies. ALP, CCI The study of identity and difference and the 
representation of bodies, genders, and desires through developments in medicine and anatomy. May include 
different historical periods. Readings from public to private documents, literary texts, playscripts, medical 
treatises, and pamphlets. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 



K’iche’ Maya (KICHE)  733

Studies 519S
585SP. Topics in Sexuality and Gender Studies: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Italian 585S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Staff.
586S. Literary Guide to Italy. ALP, CCI, CZ A journey of Italy through literary, cinematic, and musical 
texts through Italy’s sights and customs, as well as the place of Italy, both the real and imagined, in the 
aesthetics of the Grand Tour. Taught in English. Instructor: Dainotto. One course. C-L: Literature 542S, German 
586S
586SP. Literary Guide to Italy: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment 
in Italian 586S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto.
587S. Cinema and Literature in Italy. ALP, CCI A study of the relation between literature and film in 
Italy. Topics include: cinematic versions of novels, influence of literature and literary figures on the construction 
of an Italian cinematic imagination, effects of cinema on literature, women’s fiction and the woman’s picture, 
neorealism. Taught in English. Not open to students who have taken this course as Italian 170S. Instructor: 
Dainotto or Hardt. One course.
587SP. Cinema and Literature in Italy: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Italian 587S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto or Hardt.
588S. Antonio Gramsci and the Marxist Legacy. CCI, CZ, SS Gramsci’s reinterpretation of Marxism 
in the context of fascist Italy. The uses of Gramsci’s key concepts—subaltern, hegemony, dominance, popular 
culture, Americanism, Southern question—in other cultural/historical contexts, such as Indian subaltern 
historiography, British cultural studies or American literary studies. Taught in English. Instructor: Dainotto. 
One course. C-L: Literature 572S
588SP. Antonio Gramsci: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
Italian 588S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto.
590S. Topics in Italian Studies. Specific aspects of Italian history, civilization, culture, and institutions. 
Topics may vary. Taught in English. Instructor: Dainotto, Eisner, Hardt. One course.
590S-1. Topics in Renaissance Studies. Focus on a particular aspect of the Italian or European 
Renaissance. Taught in English. Instructor: Dainotto, Eisner, Hardt. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 690S-2
590SP. Topics in Italian Studies - Preceptorial. A preceptoral, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment 
in Italian 590S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Dainotto, Eisner, Hardt.
590SP-1. Renaissance Studies: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Italian, requiring concurrent enrollment 
in Italian 590S-1. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Staff.

K’iche’ Maya

Courses in K’iche’ Maya (KICHE) 
101. Elementary K’iche’ Maya I. FL Introduction to essential elements of K’iche’ Maya language and 
aspects of Maya culture. K’iche’ Maya, a language spoken by about a million people in the western Highlands of 
Guatemala, is one of the major indigenous languages in the Americas. Emphasis on active language production 
to develop basic conversational skills for everyday interactions. Course taught at Vanderbilt University; Duke 
students participate through video conference and/or telepresence classroom. No pre-requisite. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
102. Elementary K’iche’ Maya II. FL Continuation of K’iche’ Maya I. Second semester course that 
introduces the essential elements of K’iche’ Maya language and aspects of Maya culture. K’iche’ Maya, a 
language spoken by about a million people in the western Highlands of Guatemala, is one of the major 
indigenous languages in the Americas. Emphasis on active language production to develop basic conversational 
skills for everyday interactions. Course taught at Vanderbilt University; Duke students participate through video 
conference and/or telepresence classroom. Pre-requisite. K’iche’ Maya 101 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.



 Portuguese (PORTUGUE)734

203. Intermediate K’iche’ Maya I. FL Develops greater competencies in writing in K’iche’ and translation 
to/from K’iche’. Covers more advanced grammar (verb modalities) and broader range of scripts (colonial vs. 
modern orthography). Research conducted in K’iche’ using the Oral History archive at the University of New 
Mexico (https://laii.unm.edu/kiche.html). Students select a story from the online archive, listen to audio, 
correct transcription, rewrite it in modern orthography and translate it into contemporary English to present to 
classmates. Taught at Vanderbilt University; Duke students participate through video conference/telepresence 
classroom. Prerequisite: K’iche’ Maya 102 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
204. Intermediate K’iche’ Maya II. FL Students read and discuss K’iche’ language socio-historical context 
beginning with colonial texts to the present. Primarily a translating class, students read primary sources in 
K’iche’ going back to the 16th century using philological methods. Texts include colonial dictionaries and 
grammars, phrase books, wills and testaments, missionary texts from colonial period and late 19th century, 
dance dramas, and the Popol Wuj. Learn about the range of materials available in K’iche’ and the tools and 
methods used to work with these sources. Taught at Vanderbilt University; Duke students participate through 
video conference/telepresence classroom. Prerequisite: K’iche’ Maya 203 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.

Portuguese

Courses in Portuguese (PORTUGUE)
89S. First Year Seminar in Portuguese. Topics vary each semester offered. Prior to the drop/add period, 
this course is restricted to first-year students who have not fulfilled their seminar requirement. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
101. Elementary Portuguese I. FL Introduces the basic elements of the language and includes an exposure 
to some aspects of Portuguese-speaking cultures. Aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills 
receive equal attention. Conducted in Portuguese, using a communicative approach. Five class meetings a week. 
Instructors: Silva. One course.
102. Elementary Portuguese II. FL Builds on the elements of language acquired in Elementary Portuguese 
101; enrollment in Portuguese 102 presupposes acquisition of the contents covered in Portuguese 101. Speaking, 
reading, and writing skills emphasized; exposure to some aspects of Portuguese-speaking cultures an important 
component. Conducted entirely in Portuguese, using a communicative approach. Five class meetings a week. 
Prerequisite: Portuguese 101 or consent of instructor. Instructors: Silva. One course.
112. Accelerated Elementary Portuguese. FL Designed for highly motivated undergraduate and graduate 
students as well as fluent speakers of another Romance language, this course covers much of the elementary 
language sequence (Portuguese 101-102). Most grammar and textbook work is done outside of class, freeing 
class time for more communicative activities. Conversation sessions provide intensive work on grammar focused 
through discussion on issues raised in films, news media, reading, music. It is expected that students who take 
this course will be able to place directly into Portuguese 203; however, placement into Portuguese 102 may be 
recommended in some cases. Meets five times a week. Instructor: Silva. One course.
203. Intermediate Portuguese. CZ, FL Intensive language review of reading, writing, and oral practice, 
with increased attention to grammatical variety and accuracy. Cultural component emphasized through short 
readings, videos, music. Recommended prerequisite: Portuguese 102 or 112. Instructor: Silva or staff. One 
course.
203A. Intensive Brazilian Portuguese. CCI, CZ, FL Four week immersion course in Portuguese language 
and Brazilian culture, offered only in Duke in Brazil. Elementary language pre-requisite required. Covers 
intermediate language curriculum, developing aural comprehension, speaking, reading and writing skills. 
Provides grammar practice and development of effective strategies for oral communication in conjunction with 
intensive cultural program activities. Includes strong civics, social, cultural, and environmental components 
geared to NGOs that engage with these issues. Classes meet five days per week for four hours with additional 
required extracurricular activities. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Silva. One course.
204. Advanced Intermediate Portuguese. CZ, FL An advanced grammar review complemented by oral 
practice, composition, videos, and selected literary readings. Guided essay writing on topics related to the 

https://laii.unm.edu/kiche.html


Portuguese (PORTUGUE) 735

readings and videos. Second part of an intermediate sequence; suggested as preparation for 300-level courses. 
Prerequisites: Portuguese 203 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Silva. One course.
260. Afro-Brazilian Culture and History. CCI, CZ, R One course. C-L: see History 327; also C-L: African 
& African American Studies 209, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 327, Latin American 
Studies, Human Rights
290S. Topics in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Seminar exploring topics of cultural formation in 
the Portuguese-speaking world that emphasize autochthonous cultural theory. Topics include slavery, urban 
development, sexuality, social activism, and cultural production. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
301S. Advanced Colloquial Portuguese. CCI, FL, W Advanced conversation and composition through 
the study of colloquial Portuguese as a catalyst of popular culture; extensive comparisons of popular sayings, 
expressions, and proverbs; emphasis on oral communication. Contemporary short texts, “telenovelas,” video, 
music, and Internet sources. Highlights differences between Portuguese as spoken in Portugal and Brazilian 
Portuguese (syntax, vocabulary, spelling); transmits a sense of African, Azorian, and Asian Portuguese, and 
United States Portuguese communities. Prerequisites: Portuguese 203 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Silva. 
One course.
327S. Introduction to Portuguese Culture. ALP, CCI, FL An introduction to Portuguese culture through 
the cross-cultural analysis of Brazilian or Global Portuguese history, literature, cinema and arts. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
340A. Conversational Brazilian Portuguese Abroad. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, W Grammar review based 
on weekly essays and conversational units directly related to experiences and excursions of Duke in Brazil. 
Prerequisites: Portuguese 111 or equivalent, or consent of director. Instructor: Silva. One course.
341S. Perspectives on the Amazon. CCI, CZ The Amazon has been a source of awe to outsiders at least 
since the first Europeans navigated the Amazon River in 1542. While early explorers searched the forest for a 
mythic city of gold, contemporary travelers, scientists, and concerned citizens look to the Amazon as the key 
to our endangered future. Focusing on a variety of textual and visual representations, we will deal with major 
themes in the history of the Amazon and consider the ways in which this vast and widely depicted region eludes 
representation, holding entirely different and contending meanings to distinct socio-cultural groups. Our 
sources include works by indigenous thinkers and cultural producers. Instructor: Furtado. One course. C-L: 
Romance Studies 341S, Latin American Studies 341S, Literature 341S
341SP. Perspectives on the Amazon Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Portuguese, requiring concurrent 
enrollment in Romance Studies 341S or Portuguese 341S. Further information available from instructor. 
Instructor: Furtado. C-L: Romance Studies 341SP
390S. Topics in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Seminar exploring topics of cultural formation in 
the Portuguese-speaking world that emphasize autochthonous cultural theory. Examples include: Brazilian 
popular culture, Literatures of Resistance, Lusophone Africa and Independence, Portugal Post-Salazar. Level 
of Portuguese required varies with semester topic; students should consult instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Portuguese 393. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Topics in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Exploration of topics of cultural formation in 
the Portuguese-speaking world that emphasize autochthonous cultural theory. Examples include: Brazilian 
popular culture, Literatures of Resistance, Lusophone Africa and Independence, Portugal Post-Salazar. Level 
of Portuguese required varies with semester topic; students should consult instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
490S. Topics in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Seminar exploring topics of cultural formation in 



 Quechua (QUECHUA)736

the Portuguese-speaking world that emphasize autochthonous cultural theory. Examples include: Brazilian 
popular culture, Literatures of Resistance, Lusophone Africa and Independence, Portugal Post-Salazar. Level 
of Portuguese required varies with semester topic; students should consult instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
493. Research Independent Study. R See Portuguese 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Portuguese 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
497T. Portuguese Tutorial. FL Tutorial in Portuguese. Discussion group for up to five students. Topics vary 
by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
497T-1. Tutorial in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Tutorial in Lusophone Literature and Culture. 
Discussion group for up to five students. Taught in English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
512S. Transatlantic Cultures: Narratives of Discovery, Empire, Decolonization, and 
Europeanization. FL, R Explores, through literature, film, and theoretical readings, basic themes of 
Portuguese culture. Focuses on narratives of discovery, empire, decolonization, the admixture of cultures, and 
concerns of contemporary Portugal within the European Union. Questions of Portuguese identity during the 
epoch of discovery and expansion; the Portuguese presence in Asia, Africa, and Brazil; the role of postcolonial 
Portugal and Lusophone culture within the European context. Taught in Portuguese, translations of readings 
available. Prerequisite: 300-level Portuguese course or consent of instructor. Instructors: Furtado, Aidoo, and 
staff. One course.
590. Topics in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Exploration of topics of cultural formation in 
the Portuguese-speaking world that emphasize autochthonous cultural theory. Examples include: Brazilian 
popular culture, Literatures of Resistance, Lusophone Africa and Independence, Portugal Post-Salazar. Level 
of Portuguese required varies with semester topic; students should consult instructor. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
590S. Topics in Lusophone Literature and Culture. Exploration of topics of cultural formation in the 
Portuguese-speaking world that emphasize autochthonous cultural theory. Examples include: Brazilian popular 
culture, Literatures of Resistance, Lusophone Africa and Independence, Portugal Post-Salazar. A graduate-level 
course open to juniors and seniors. Level of Portuguese required varies with semester topic; students should 
consult instructor. Prerequisite: 300-level Portuguese course or consent of instructor. Instructors: Furtado, 
Aidoo, and staff. One course.
590SP. Preceptorial in Lusophone Literature and Culture. A preceptorial in Portuguese, requiring 
concurrent enrollment in Portuguese 590S. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Furtado, 
Aidoo, and staff.

Quechua

Course in Quechua (QUECHUA)
113A. Beginning Quechua. FL Introduction through immersion to the history and structure of Quechua. 
(Taught in the Duke in the Andes Program only.) Instructor: Staff. One course.

Spanish

Courses in Spanish (SPANISH) 
89S. First-Year Seminar in Spanish. FL Seminar for first-year undergraduates with the desire and ability 
to take courses in literature, history, culture, art, cinema, or drama in Spanish at the 300-level. Topics vary 
each semester offered. For students thinking about majoring or minoring in the language, counts towards 
both. Prerequisite: SAT II score 660 or above, AP Language score of 5, or Literature score of 4 or 5. Heritage 
speakers or students who did high school work in Spanish encouraged to enroll after consulting with instructor. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



Spanish (SPANISH)  737

92A. Culture and Language in Costa Rica. CZ Everyday culture in Costa Rica with attention to 
environmental topics and issues. Taught at Duke Global Education Office programs in Costa Rica. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
101. Elementary Spanish 1. FL Introduces the basic elements of the language and includes exposure to 
aspects of Spanish-speaking cultures. Equal attention to aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing 
skills conducted entirely in Spanish using a task-based approach. Four class meetings a week. Not open for 
credit to students who have had three or more years of Spanish in high school. Prerequisite: No previous college 
study of Spanish, or no more than three years of high school Spanish, or appropriate language placement score. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Elementary Spanish 2. FL This course builds on the elements of the language acquired in Elementary 
Spanish 101; enrollment in Spanish 102 presupposes acquisition of the contents covered in Spanish 101. 
Speaking, reading, and writing skills emphasized; exposure to Spanish-speaking cultures. Classes conducted 
entirely in Spanish, using a task-based approach. Four class meetings a week. Prerequisite: Spanish 101 or 
appropriate placement test score. Instructors: Paredes and staff. One course.
111. Intensive Elementary Spanish. FL Covers the basic elementary language curriculum (Spanish 101 and 
102) in one semester. Aural comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills. Exposure to Spanish-speaking 
cultures. Taught in Spanish, using a task-based approach. Not open to students who have had one year (or 
more) of Spanish in high school. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
140A. Duke in Alicante: Intensive Elementary Institute. FL Covers the basic elementary language 
curriculum (Spanish 101 & 102) in one summer session in Alicante, Spain. Equal attention to aural 
comprehension, speaking, reading, and writing skills conducted entirely in Spanish using a task-based approach. 
Includes exposure to aspects of Spanish-speaking cultures. 4 hours a day of classroom instruction (M-TH); 
required extracurricular activities. For more information see the Global Education Office website. Instructor: 
Staff. Two courses.
160. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201; also C-L: African & African American Studies 104, International 
Comparative Studies 106, Literature 243
160S. Introduction to Latino/a Studies in the Global South. ALP, CCI, SS One course. C-L: see 
Latino/a Studies in the Global South 201S; also C-L: Literature 243S, African & African American Studies 104S, 
International Comparative Studies 106S
190FS. Focus Topics in Spanish and Latin American Literature and Culture. Topics on single 
authors, genres, movements, or themes. Taught in English. Topics course. Open only to students in the Focus 
program. Instructor: Paredes, staff. One course.
203. Intermediate Spanish. CZ, FL This course builds on the elements of the language acquired in the 
elementary sequence; enrollment in this course presupposes acquisition of Spanish 101 and 102 contents. 
Continued development of the four language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Expanding range 
and complexity of grammar usage and vocabulary. Exposure to Spanish-speaking cultures. Prerequisite: Spanish 
102 or 111, or appropriate placement test score. Instructors: Paredes and staff. One course.
204. Advanced Intermediate Spanish. CZ, FL This course builds on the elements of the language acquired 
in Spanish 101 through 203. Further development of the four language skills: listening, speaking, reading and 
writing. Expanding range and sophistication of grammar usage and vocabulary. Exposure to Spanish-speaking 
cultures. Work with comprehension and production of texts of greater extension and complexity. Prepares 
students for 300-level Spanish courses. Prerequisite: Spanish 203, or appropriate placement test score. 
Instructors: Paredes and staff. One course.
205. Advanced Intermediate Spanish with Service-Learning. CZ, FL Same as Spanish 204, except 
with a service-learning component. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: Paredes and staff. One course.
206. Advanced Intermediate Spanish with Community Engagement. CZ, FL Same as Spanish 204, 
except with community engagement. Course integrates academic language learning and interactions with the 
local Spanish speaking community to learn about their culture. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Paredes 
and staff. One course.



 Spanish (SPANISH) 738

209. Intermediate Spanish for Heritage Learners. CCI, CZ, FL This course is the first of a two-course 
sequence for heritage Spanish learners. It aims to reconnect students with their linguistic and cultural heritage 
to further them through meaningful experiences. Activities in this course empower heritage learners to apply 
their bilingual/bicultural knowledge in academic and professional settings. Students have the opportunity to 
a) discuss topics relevant to their interests, use presentational skills to write and talk about them b) conduct 
sociolinguistic research, develop critical and integrative thinking skills in Spanish, and c) gain skills required to 
work professionally in a Spanish-speaking environment. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Munne and/or 
Paredes. One course.
240A. Duke in Alicante: Intensive Intermediate Institute. CZ, FL Covers intermediate Spanish 
language curriculum (Spanish 203, 204) in one summer session in Alicante, Spain. Builds on elements of 
language acquired in Spanish 101 and 102. Further development of listening, speaking, reading, writing skills. 
Expanding range and sophistication of grammar usage and vocabulary. Exposure to Spanish-speaking cultures. 
Work with comprehension and production of complex texts. Focus on ability to structure ideas in speaking and 
writing. Prepares students for 300-level Spanish courses. 4 hours/day classroom instruction (M-Th); required 
extracurricular activities. Prerequisite: Spanish 102 or 111. For more information see Global Education Office 
website. Instructor: Parades and staff. Two courses.
270T-1. Voices in Global Health: Spanish Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Global Health 270T-6
271T. Voices in Public Policy: Spanish Tutorial. Half course. C-L: see Public Policy 273T-1
272T-1. Voices in the Environment: Spanish. Half course. C-L: see Environment 269T-1
275T-1. Voices in Cultural Anthropology: Advertising in Spanish. Half course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 275T-1
290. Special Topics in Spanish Studies. Topics in Spanish literature and culture to be announced. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
301. Advanced Spanish Writing. CCI, FL, W Development of academic writing skills in Spanish with a 
focus on techniques for identifying a topic, conducting research, organizing information to appeal to readers, 
drafting, revising, and editing. Focus on improving grammatical and lexical variety and accuracy in students’ 
writing in Spanish. Peer feedback and group work are key activities in the course. Products include a summary, 
an analysis written collaboratively, and a 6-8 page research paper and presentation. This course is strongly 
recommended before enrolling in Spanish 331S and higher courses. Instructors: Paredes and staff. One course.
302. Advanced Spanish Grammar. CCI, FL Intended to foster students’ reflection about Spanish grammar 
and to consolidate students’ knowledge of the system of rules underlying the Spanish languages. Special 
attention given to grammar in oral and written communication. Not open to students who have previously taken 
both Spanish 301 and 303. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or appropriate placement test score. Instructors: Paredes 
and staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 301
303. Introduction to Cultural Studies. CCI, FL Introduction to ideologies and political debates that shape 
the cultural configuration of Hispanic communities both within and outside the US Borders. The main goal is to 
explore and examine critically how particular discourses (within different genres and media) relate to politics, 
art, culture, and society. Articles, literary texts, films, web sites, etc. will serve as resources. As students engage 
with cultural studies, it is expected that they achieve discursive complexity and linguistic accuracy through 
vocabulary development, group and individual presentations, video recordings, writing projects and debates. 
Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructors: Paredes and staff. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the 
Global South
305. Advanced Spanish for Heritage Learners. CCI, CZ, FL, W This course is designed for heritage 
or bilingual students who grew up speaking Spanish at home, but have been educated almost exclusively in 
English. Together we will explore, reflect, and express opinions about topics that affect the diverse Latino 
communities in the United States such as: identity, bilingual education, immigration, health and human rights 
issues. Through reading current news and literary works, and listening and watching audiovisual media, 
students will develop the ability to read and write in Spanish in formal contexts, and also comprehend and 
compare the diversity and commonality of their Hispanic heritage. Instructor: Munné and/or Paredes. One 
course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 305



Spanish (SPANISH)  739

306. Health, Culture, and the Latino Community. CCI, FL Exploration of health issues in the Spanish-
speaking world shaped by social, cultural, political, ethnic, and economic determinants. Topics: cultural 
competency, community beliefs, medical practices and policies, preventive medicine, mental health. Projects 
include presentations, writing, research, and conversations with local and global contacts. Evaluation on 
knowledge of content, oral and written proficiency in Spanish. One 300-level Spanish course recommended 
prior to enrolling. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies 
in the Global South 306, Global Health 326, Cultural Anthropology 306, Human Rights
306A. Language, Culture, and Health in Costa Rica. CCI, FL Builds proficiency in oral and written 
Spanish through exploration of language, culture, and issues related to health in Costa Rica. Learning through 
personal observations and classroom discussions based on readings and guest speakers. Interaction with 
community in interviews and visits to local organizations and health providers to further knowledge on 
issues that impact community life. Assessment based on language and content of written and oral projects. 
Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Taught in Duke-in-Costa Rica summer program. Instructor: Clifford, 
Fernandez, Staff. One course. C-L: Global Health 326A
307S. Issues of Education and Immigration. CCI, FL Community-based interaction with Durham Public 
Schools and NALEO’s educational campaign: ¡Hágase Contar! Censo 2020. Topics: Latino/a/x identities, 
educational pathways for Spanish-speakers in our community, relevant public policy and legislation, and social 
action. Required 20 hours outside of class with assigned community partners. Assessment on knowledge of 
content, oral and written Spanish, and participation in service. Recommended students take 300-level Spanish 
course prior to enrolling. Recommended prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Paredes and staff. 
One course. C-L: Education 307S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 307S
308S. Latinx Voices in Duke, Durham, and Beyond. CCI, CZ, FL, W Construction of Latinx 
identity(ies) and formation of community voices through the lens of cultural, political, and social issues at local 
and national level. Assessment on knowledge of content, oral and written Spanish. Includes service-learning 
component. Recommended students take 300-level Spanish course prior to enrolling. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 308S
309S. Spanish in the U.S. CCI, FL, SS Focus on linguistic development and current presence of Spanish 
in the United States. Students will develop linguistic and critical awareness about the relationship between 
Spanish language and society, with special emphasis on topics such as language variety, language contact from 
a social, political and educational perspective, types of bilingualism, sociolinguistic issues, migration patterns 
and settlements, etc. Readings in English and in Spanish with class discussion in Spanish. Previous 300-level 
Spanish work strongly recommended, or bilingual or nearly bilingual proficiency in Spanish). Instructor: Munne 
or staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 309S
310. Translating Spanish-English and English-Spanish. ALP, CCI, FL Introduction to theories of 
translation and practice translating Spanish to English and English to Spanish. Students will explore key 
ethical concerns related to translation and interpretation, negotiate translation of cultural references, learn 
about concepts such as localization and internationalization, and give each other feedback on translation 
drafts and editing. Products created individually or in collaboration include ads, comics, poems, newspaper 
articles, subtitling and dubbing for film clips, a community project, and reflections on the translation process. 
Prerequisite: 300-level Spanish course or equivalent, with advanced proficiency in Spanish. Consent of 
instructor is required. Instructor: Simmermeyer, Munne. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 
310, Linguistics 310
311. Intensive Summer Spanish: Food Production and Consumption in NC and Peru. CCI, CZ, 
FL Intensive summer course builds on elements acquired in Spanish 203 while engaging in multidisciplinary 
examination of food production/consumption in NC and Peru. Further development of language skills in context 
of comparative exploration of impacts of globalization on modes of preparation, distribution, marketing of food 
and how these exchanges affect perceptions of economic, political, social, cultural processes. Focus on Peruvian 
cuisine with excursions to restaurants, farms, markets in NC. Students engage in collaborative and individual 
research, presenting findings in Spanish. Instructor consent required. Prerequisite: Spanish 203. Not open to 
students who have taken Spanish 204 or 303. Instructor: Paredes or Staff. Two courses.
312. Community-Based Research with Spanish-Speakers. CCI, FL, SS Course partners with Duke 
faculty to assist them in implementing research projects in the Spanish-speaking community. Students will 



 Spanish (SPANISH) 740

volunteer a minimum of 20 hours as interpreters, survey takers, assisting in home visits, etc. as needed. 
Exploration of topics related to research study such as education or health to contextualize CBR. Students will 
also focus on research methods, cultural competency, and linguistic skills necessary to interact with Latino/a 
community. Students assessed on knowledge of content, oral and written Spanish, and participation in service. 
Pre-requisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Prior 300 level coursework recommended. Service-learning course. 
Instructor: Clifford or staff. One course.
313. Bridging Cultures: Latino Lives and Experiences in NC. CCI, FL, SS Exploration of key issues 
surrounding Latino communities in Durham and beyond, focusing on issues of culture and immigration, health, 
education, economy. Course includes a minimum of 15 hours of service-learning with a local organization, 
plus other out-of-class and weekend community trips. Projects promote the development of intercultural 
competence, as well as facilitate opportunities for building bridges with the local community. Assessment 
based on knowledge of content, oral and written Spanish, and community engagement. Previous 300-level 
course is recommended before taking this class. Minimum requirement: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Fernandez or Staff. One course.
314A. Aproximaciones a la Gastronomía de España: Política, Sociedad y Cultura. CCI, CZ, 
FL This Duke in Madrid intensive course builds on the elements of the language acquired in Spanish 101 
through 203, combining advanced intermediate Spanish (Spanish 204) and advanced 300-level Spanish. 
Further development of the four language skills: listening, speaking, reading and writing. Expanding range 
and sophistication of grammar usage and vocabulary. Exposure to Spanish-speaking cultures. Work with 
comprehension and production of texts of greater extension and complexity. Satisfies one course requirement 
for Spanish majors or minors. Instructor consent required. Recommended prerequisite: Spanish 203 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
315A. Language and Culture of Entrepreneurship in Latin America. CCI, CZ, FL This Duke in Chile 
course focuses on learning culture through social and for-profit entrepreneurship in Latin America, with an aim 
at developing proficiency in Spanish through linguistic, social, and cultural immersion through interactions 
with the entrepreneurial community. Course builds on elements of the language acquired in Spanish 101-
203, providing continued development of listening, speaking, reading and writing skills; improving range and 
sophistication of grammar usage and vocabulary. Students complete the equivalent of Spanish 204 and Spanish 
303. Satisfies one course requirement for Spanish majors or minors. Prerequisite: Spanish 203 or equivalent. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Two courses. C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 315A
316S. Global Humanities in Spanish. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, W For students with advanced or native 
Spanish, a gateway to the Spanish major focusing on global humanities in Spanish. Key humanistic 
contributions in peninsular, Latin American, and Latinx contexts, as organized around comparative themes, 
regions, and eras. From colonial /indigenous encounter to border studies, Cervantes to José Martí and Rosario 
Castellanos to Sandra CIsneros, political economy to food studies, and natural history to decolonial arts and 
literatures. Novels, films, poems, and paintings, as well as critical and historical writing—in digestible bites. 
Frequent, diverse writing assignments and group work. A foundation for lifelong cultural navigation/enrichment 
in Spanish. Recommended prerequisite: native speaker status, AP Spanish exam score of 5, or other advanced 
Spanish training. Instructor: Vilches. One course.
327S. Spanish for Freshmen and Sophomores. ALP, CCI, FL Selected readings on topics concerning the 
different national literatures of Spain and Latin America. Open only to first years and sophomores. Prerequisite: 
Spanish 204 or placement/achievement score of 630 or above. Instructor: Staff. One course.
331S. Introduction to Literature, Film, and Popular Culture. ALP, FL Introduction to a wide variety 
of texts from both Spain and Latin America, with emphasis on how they can mean different things to different 
readers. Course develops student skills in reading, writing, and speaking, and emphasizes personal approaches 
to readings. Recommended prerequisite: Spanish 301, or AP score of 5 on Spanish Language exam, or SATII 
score of 660+, or other equivalent experience. Students who have taken more than one course above 331S 
should not take this course. Instructor: Sieburth and staff. One course.
332. Introduction to Spanish Literature I. ALP, CCI, FL Major writers of the Spanish literary tradition 
and the historical contexts from which they emerged: Middle Ages through the seventeenth century. Poetry, 
fiction, theater and essay and historical readings and film. Includes attention to Judaic and Islamic civilizations 
and expression in medieval Spain. Prerequisite: Spanish 301, 331S, or AP Spanish Literature score of 5. 



Spanish (SPANISH)  741

Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 314
333. Introduction to Spanish Literature II. ALP, CCI, FL A survey of major writers and movements of 
the Spanish literary tradition in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries. Prerequisite: Spanish 301, 
331S, or AP Spanish Literature score of 5. Instructor: Staff. One course.
333A. Literature and the Arts in Modern Spain. ALP, CZ, FL Literature is one of the many genres 
and media artists have used to capture on-going transformations in our ways of looking at reality. This course 
will focus on the dialogue that exists between literature, painting, and film. Offered through the Duke in Spain 
program. Prerequisite: Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies
334. Introduction to Spanish-American Literature. ALP, CCI, FL A survey of major writers and 
movements from the periods of discovery to conquest, colonial rule, and early independence. Includes works by 
native Indian, “mestizo”, and women writers. Prerequisite: Spanish 301, 331S, or AP Spanish Literature score of 
5. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies
335. Introduction to Spanish-American Literature. ALP, CCI, FL A survey from Independence to 
the Contemporary period. Prerequisite: Spanish 301, 331S, or AP Spanish Language score of 5 or AP Spanish 
Literature score of 4 or 5. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies, International Comparative 
Studies
336. Introduction to US Latino/a Literature. ALP, CCI Survey of US Latino/a Literature from 1960s to 
present. Examines formation of a Latino/a literary canon, its heterogeneous voices and imaginations, thematic 
strands, historical and political contexts, theoretical approaches, establishing critical overview of the range of 
nationalities, communities, identifications, and practices falling under the Latino/a designation. Explores how 
Latina and Latino identities have been envisioned and manifested since the Civil Rights Movement, and how 
Latina- or Latino-specific cultural production continues in dialogue with US multiracial landscape. Satisfies 
survey requirement for Spanish major. In English; does not satisfy Trinity FL requirement. Instructor: Milian. 
One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 336, Literature 336
339. El cine político en américa Latina. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Examines question of political cinema through 
Latin American works from 1960s to present, including examples from ‘New Latin American Cinema’, with 
special focus on Brazil and Cuba. Emblematic films, manifestos and critical texts will define and contextualize 
alternate conceptions of “political” cinema. Examination of modes of production and distribution of “guerrilla” 
films; politics of film language inspiring experimentation of avant-garde aesthetics in fictional and documentary 
works; relationship between cinema and political memory; politics of gender, race, and sexual orientation; 
representations of social problems, including contemporary blockbuster thrillers. Conducted in Spanish. 
Instructor: Furtado. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 383, Latin American Studies 327, Literature 339
340A. Communication Skills. CCI, FL Develops communication skills through oral expression. Exercises 
include role playing of every day situations, discussing newspaper articles and literary texts, having debates 
on controversial current issues, films etc. Grammatical correction emphasized as well as appropriate cultural 
levels of expression and colloquial phrases. Written language objectives; four compositions during the semester. 
(Taught in Spain and Ecuador, in Duke-in-Madrid and Duke-in-the Andes study abroad programs.) Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
341A. Art, Cultural Identity, Social Change: Political History of Cont Spanish Art: Goya to 
Global Society. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL This Duke in Madrid course is a survey of Spanish contemporary art 
from Goya to current art practices. From an interdisciplinary perspective, including new contributions from art 
history, performance, cultural, visual, and women studies, the course explores the evolution of social, political, 
economic, and cultural contexts that have shaped Spanish art from the origins of the modernity to the present. 
In addition to theoretical lectures, and during visits to some important art collections, the professor will provide 
students with key points of discussion—artistic, but also economic, cultural and political contextual keys in order 
to build a collective conversation. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Art History 341A
342A. From Transition to Indignation: Social Movements in Spain 1977-2013. CCI, EI, FL, 
SS Provides a comprehensive and panoramic critical approach to evolution of Social Movements in Spain from 
the political transition until today. Students gain overall view which establishes different links connecting social 
forms. Through texts, group sharing and direct encounters with activists, participants better understand the 



 Spanish (SPANISH) 742

recent history of Spain through the eyes of associations and groups of citizens who have been implicated in its 
social, cultural, political and economic reality. In addition to a rigorous theoretical and analytical approach, 
course possesses a strong experiential component that facilitates meaningful learning of content. Offered 
through Duke in Madrid program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Sociology 346A, History 353A
343A. Decentering Spanish Otherness: Visual Culture and Coloniality in Contemporary Spain. 
ALP, CCI, CZ, FL This course proposes the study of visual culture in Spain from the nineteenth century to the 
present day from decolonial and postcolonial perspectives. It will analyze the history and cultural legacies of 
Spanish colonialism through photography, film, illustration and art from a transdisciplinary point of view, with 
special emphasis on cultural studies, visual studies and visual anthropology. Offered through Duke in Madrid 
program. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 278A
344A. The Politics of Salsa: Music, Urban Spaces and Globalization. ALP, CCI, FL This Duke in 
Cuba Havana-based course investigates urban spaces through the lens of salsa music. With Havana as the 
focal point, students comparatively reflect on how musical and/or cultural production shapes urban spaces 
throughout the Caribbean (e.g., Caracas, San Juan) and US cities (e.g., Miami, New York) where Cuban and 
other Caribbean diasporas are at stake. It also takes into consideration the historical impact of globalization 
on cultural and socio-economic urban development. Readings from Cultural Studies, History, and Musicology. 
Original research projects using primary and secondary materials written in academic Spanish. Prerequisite: 
Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Villalba. One course. C-L: Music 325A, Cultural Anthropology 348A, 
Latin American Studies, Latino/a Studies in the Global South
361. Latin American Literature in Translation. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 375; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 339
363S. The Idea of Latin America in the Global World Order. CCI, CZ, FL This course will investigate 
the multilayered implications of the term ‘Latin America’ and the place of the sub-continent in the current 
global re-ordering. From the political and social insights of Immortal Technique, to tourist industry advertising, 
mainstream media outlets, and film and literature from across the region we will cast a wide net to explore this 
question, build historical context, and in the process attempt to ‘unlearn’ much of the received understanding 
invented and maintained by colonial and imperial powers and local elites. Taught in Spanish. Prerequisite: 
Spanish 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Mignolo. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies 363S
364. The Art and Cultural History of Flamenco. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 365L
370S. Sublime Pleasures? Chocolate and Tobacco in the Americas and across the Atlantic. ALP, 
CCI, CZ, FL, R For the indigenous cultures of Mesoamerica chocolate and tobacco inspired complex sets of 
myths binding humans, the environment, and the divine. For Europeans these substances were too exotic and 
enticing, and quickly perceived as either symbols of power, panaceas, or sublime pleasures. Students will explore 
the material cultures that understood these substances as either pathways to gods, or enticing pleasures. Taught 
in Spanish. Instructor: Vilches. One course.
373S. The Spanish Civil War in History and Literature. ALP, CZ, EI, FL The Spanish Civil War of 
1936-39 through literary and historical readings, art, music, and film. Special attention given to values held 
by supporters of each side, and how they put them into practice during and after the war. Consideration of 
international volunteers who fought fascism in Spain, with special attention to American volunteers. Taught 
in Spanish. Not open to students who have taken Spanish 431S or Human Rights 431S. Recommended 
prerequisite: Spanish 331S or Spanish 316S, or higher, or permission of instructor. Instructor: Sieburth. One 
course. C-L: History 273S-1, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 373S
380S. Political Cinema in Latin America. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL What counts as “political cinema”? What 
are the possible relations between cinema and politics, particularly in Latin America? How can cinema not only 
comment on political issues but also perform politics through practices of production and aesthetic choices that 
are germane to film as a cultural form? This course explores these and related questions through a survey of 
landmark Latin American works from the mid-twentieth century to the present. Taught in Spanish. Instructor: 
Furtado. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 420S, Literature 381S, Latin American Studies 380S
390. Topics in Spanish Studies. Topics in Spanish literature and culture to be announced. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
390-3. Special Topics in Latin American Studies. A problem-oriented course integrating approaches 



Spanish (SPANISH)  743

from different disciplines. Topics and disciplines vary from year to year. For juniors and seniors. Required 
capstone course for students seeking the certificate in Latin American Studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-4. Topics in Hispanic Civilization. FL A humanistic, cross-cultural study of Spain or Spanish America 
through history, culture, people, and institutions. Topics may vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics. Topics differ by section. Taught in 
English. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390A-1. Advanced Spanish Language Abroad. Topics may vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390P. Topics in Spanish: Preceptorial. A preceptorial, in Spanish, requiring concurrent enrollment in 
Spanish 390. Further information available from instructor. Instructor: Staff.
390S. Special Topics in Spanish Studies. Topics in Spanish literature and culture to be announced. Topics 
vary by semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-5. Topics in Spanish Linguistics. FL Topics vary each semester. Specific themes related to social 
linguistics. Involves students’ collecting and analyzing linguistic data, framing, and testing hypotheses. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 390S-01
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R See Spanish 393. Open only to qualified juniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
409S. Identity and Linguistic Rights in the Spanish Speaking Americas. CCI, CZ, EI, FL This course 
brings together the topics of language and human rights, exploring questions of language contact, bilingualism 
and endangered languages from the perspective of social injustices and human rights. The focus of the course 
is on how language is used to shape and negotiate identities and how it reflects and sustains social realities; 
this course will examine and reflect on situations of oppression and how they are associated to sociolinguistic 
attitudes, behavior and cultural expressions. Taught in Spanish. Instructor: Paredes. One course. C-L: 
Linguistics 409S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 409S, Human Rights
410. Spanish Literature of the Renaissance and the Baroque. ALP, CCI, FL Selected works of 16th 
and 17th centuries in Spain with attention to their reflection of social, religious, political, and economic currents 
of the age, including: Pan-European cultural influences in the Renaissance; the complex effects of the New 
World encounter; the prominent role of material and visual culture; conflicts of identity stemming from racial, 
ethnic and religious tensions; and the contest for social mobility, power, and political authority. Prerequisite: 
Spanish 332, 333, 334 or 335. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 458
411. Golden Age Literature: Cervantes. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Includes reading either selected works by 
Cervantes (dramas, novellas, and part of Don Quixote) or the Quixote in its entirety. Attention to the Roman 
and/or Arab conquests of Spain, Spanish relations with Algeria, England, Italy, and the Americas, the obsession 
with “limpieza de sangre” and the fate of Spain’s “morisco” population. Prerequisite: Spanish 332, 333, 334 or 
335. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 459
412S. Mayas, Aztecs, and Incas: The World According to the Indigenous People of Latin America. 
CZ, EI, FL, R The basic philosophical architecture of the three great civilizations of America; Maya, Aztec and 
Inca civilizations. Links the current indigenous revival in the Andes (Bolivia and Ecuador) and in the South 
of Mexico and Guatemala with the survival of their historical legacies. Instructor: Mignolo. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 367S, International Comparative Studies 460S, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 
412S
414A. Urban Fiction and Collective Imagination: Madrid Through Literature and Film. ALP, 
CCI, CZ, FL This Duke in Madrid course offers a panoramic look at some of the most important, contemporary 
artistic and cultural expressions and how they represent Madrid. While looking at historical, social and artistic 
contexts, we will spend time reflecting and engaging in debates about issues that have been shaping the 
dynamics of modern cities such as multiculturalism, migration and the role of women. Also, we will look for a 
way to position Madrid in the face of global questions about Hispanic culture and how it is perceived in other 



 Spanish (SPANISH) 744

countries. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 414A
419A. Spanish Cinema from the Transition to the Present. ALP, CCI, FL Overview of Spanish cinema, 
from transition to our present days. Having undergone dramatic transformation in past years, Spanish film 
offers privileged area to study main features, novelties, contradictions, and tensions. Analyzes two chronological 
phases: the mid 70s to late 80s, characterized by intense cinematic negotiation with immediate past that unveils 
cracks and violences of normalizing erasure proposed from the political institutions; and the 90s until the 
present, a period marked by Spanish film’s entrance in the global market, with its identitarian reassessment and 
emphasis in new pressing issues such as immigration, memory, and gender violence. Offered through Duke in 
Madrid program. Instructor: Canteli. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 419A
420A. Poéticas de aquí y de allá / Thinking Language: Poetics from Here and There. ALP, FL An 
overview of current Spanish and Transatlantic poetry, with special attention to poetics (i.e. how poetry thinks 
the world while it thinks itself). Following critical interventions of authors like Gertrude Stein or Octavio Paz, 
and poems and reflections of contemporary authors like Antonio Gamoneda, Olvido García Valdés, or Eduardo 
Milán, course considers theoretical issues such as subjectivity, poetry’s relation to thought, its formal, or the 
question about reality. Also explores the possibilities of language to serve as a powerful tool of resistance and 
memory. Students will have the opportunity to meet and converse with some of these poets. Offered through 
Duke in Madrid program. Instructor: Canteli. One course. C-L: Literature 420A
431S. The Spanish Civil War: History, Literature, and Popular Culture. ALP, CZ, EI, FL, R The 
Spanish Civil War of 1936-39 through literary and historical readings, art, music, and film. Special attention 
given to values held by supporters of each side, and how they put them into practice during and after the war. 
Consideration of international volunteers who fought in Spain for their own deeply-held values. Research paper 
and presentation required. Taught in Spanish. Not open to students who have taken Spanish 373S, History 
273S-1, or Human Rights 373S. Recommended prerequisite: Spanish 331S or higher, or permission of instructor. 
Instructor: Sieburth. One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 431S
432S. Popular Culture and Political Repression in Spain and Latin America. ALP, CCI, 
FL Exploration of a significant body of Spanish and Latin American fiction produced under repressive political 
regimes. Course explores how fictional characters and real people use popular culture as a coping mechanism 
in societies which impose severe political and social limitations on acceptable behavior. Also address uses of 
popular culture in democratic contexts including the US and draw comparisons to its uses under dictatorship. 
Authors include Cervantes, Galdós, Borges, Marsé, and Puig. Instructor: Sieburth. One course. C-L: Human 
Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 432S, Latin American Studies, Human Rights, International 
Comparative Studies
433S. Photography in the Americas: War, Tourism, Art, and Protest. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Since it 
emerged in the 19th century until today, the camera has framed our way of seeing and understanding the world. 
In this course, students accompany the camera in its path through major events in the Americas—North, South, 
and Central—and examine the profound connections between them. We discuss photography as a weapon of 
war, a souvenir for tourists, an instrument of protest, an illustration of history, a journalistic and ethnographic 
tool, and an artistic medium. Key developments in photographic processes, from half tone printing to digital 
imaging, offer opportunities to reflect on the relationship between visual culture and technology, and art and 
politics. Taught in Spanish. Instructor: Gabara. One course. C-L: Art History 433S, International Comparative 
Studies 459S, Visual and Media Studies 433S, Latin American Studies
434S. Capitalism in the Modern City: Men, Women and Money in 19th- and 21st-Century Madrid. 
ALP, CCI, FL Exploration of the new culture of nineteenth-century Madrid as a modern city, with its crowds, 
cafés and shop windows, and how capitalism radically changed relationships, between human beings in general, 
and between men and women in particular. Course concludes with a look at the crisis of capitalism that began 
in 2008. Authors include Larra, Galdós, Pardo Bazán, Muñoz Molina, and others. Recommended prerequisite: 
Spanish 332, 333, 334, or 335. Instructor: Sieburth. One course.
440A. Spain in the 21st Century. CCI, CZ, FL Political, social, cultural, historical, and literary aspects of 
contemporary Spain. Taught in Duke in Madrid. Instructor: Staff. One course.
440AS. Literature and the Performing Arts II. ALP, CCI, FL Selected literary works of the nineteenth 
and twentieth centuries that have been rendered in film or are presently on stage in Madrid. Attendance at 
performance of the films or plays. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Spanish (SPANISH)  745

441A. Spain: Cultural Studies. CCI, CZ, FL Intensive course. Selected linguistic, literary, social, and 
political issues. Discussions on the role of the regional autonomies and the place of Spain within the European 
Union. (Taught in the Duke-in-Madrid and Duke-in-Spain Programs.) Instructor: Staff. One course.
490A. Spain: Special Topics Abroad. A special topics course on various aspects of Spanish art, cinema, 
painting, drama, and literature. Topics to be announced. (Taught in Duke-in-Madrid program). Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
490AS. Duke in Andes: Special Topics. Various aspects of literatures and cultures of the Andes. Specific 
topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S. Spanish Literature. FL Various aspects of the literatures of Spain and Spanish-America with a cross-
cultural perspective. Specific topics to be announced. Prerequisite: Spanish 332, 333, 334 or 335. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
490S-2. Special Topics in US Latina/o Literatures and Cultural Studies. Special topics in United 
States Latina/o literatures and cultural studies. Topics to be announced. Open to juniors and seniors. Counts 
towards the Spanish major but can only be counted once toward the core course requirement; subsequent 
courses would count as related courses. Counts only once for the minor. Taught in English. Instructor: Milian or 
staff. One course. C-L: Latino/a Studies in the Global South 490S
493. Research Independent Study. R See Spanish 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Spanish 393. Open only to qualified seniors by consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495AS. Honors Seminar. CCI, FL, R Basic training in research methodologies for students preparing to 
write an honors thesis on a Spanish or Latin American topic. Student presentations weekly on research topics 
and submission of substantial drafts of honors thesis proposals. (Taught in Madrid.) Consent of instructor 
required. Prerequisite: Two 300-level Spanish courses. Instructor: Staff. One course.
496. Honors Thesis. R Directed research and writing of honors thesis. Open only to qualified seniors 
pursuing the Graduation with Distinction track by consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
511S. Critical Methods in Spanish Studies. R Capstone seminar. Open to seniors pursuing Graduation 
with Distinction. Instructor: Staff. One course.
512S. Topics in Spanish Linguistics. FL, R, SS In-depth analysis of one area of Spanish linguistics. Topics 
may include Spanish phonology, Spanish syntax, discourse analysis, applied linguistics, or Spanish pragmatics. 
Small research projects with a hands-on approach required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Linguistics 512S
530. Emigrants and Immigrants: Spain in the Sixties and Now. ALP, CCI, FL A study of the cultural 
processes generated by two significant migratory movements in Spain: one in Catalonia in the 1960s and early 
1970s, composed mostly of impoverished peasants coming from southern Spain; and the more recent global 
wave composed of Latin American, African, and Filipino immigrants to the affluent post-industrial areas. The 
seminar will use literary and cinematic texts, and testimonial narratives. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
538S. Revolution in the Novel/Novel of Revolution. ALP, CCI, EI, FL Exploration of Spanish 
novel from 1962 to 1987, a period of exceptional development highlighting ‘radical artifice’ including use of 
parody, multiple narrators, subplots and time schemes, as well as countless self-reflexive devices. Collectively 
representing a ‘revolution in the novel’, these works also provide complex and sophisticated commentaries on 
vexed contemporary questions concerning the direction of Spanish politics and society spanning the years of late 
Francoism and the transition to democracy, reflecting both ‘revolutionary’ and ‘counter-revolutionary’ trends—
including the unfinished revolution of women’s emancipation addressed through key works by women authors 
of the period. Instructor: Rodriguez-Garcia. One course.
539S. Atlantic Constellations: Migration, Exile, Second Slavery. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL This seminar 
explores the collective identities of migrant and exiled Spaniards away from the homeland. They remained on 
the move in large numbers for two centuries, immersing themselves in the cultures of their places of arrival 
while giving their preexisting persuasions a new life overseas. We’ll consider four main themes: 1) Ibero-Atlantic 



 Spanish (SPANISH) 746

diasporas since the mid-nineteenth century; 2) white slavery and second slavery in Cuba; 3) Spain’s unfinished 
revolutions; and 4) the career of María Zambrano, an expatriate intellectual who turned her banishment from 
Spain in 1939 into the enabling condition of her radical revision of Western philosophy. Prerequisite: 300-level 
or above Spanish course that meets foreign language (FL) requirement or graduate standing. Instructor: 
Rodríguez García. One course. C-L: History 542S, International Comparative Studies 539S
540S. Many Mexicos. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL A fresh look at contemporary writing referencing the need for 
political change and the reality of social inertia caused by unexamined dogmas, sectarian violence and economic 
self-interest. Readings will include pre-1950 novels (Mariano Azuela, D. H. Lawrence, José Revueltas) variously 
engaging the “dark side” of mass movements and party politics; works drawn from the literary “saga del 68” 
focused on student protests of 1968, including Elena Poniatowska’s controversial La noche de Tlatelolco (1971); 
Juan Villoro’s novel Arrecife (2012), a window onto the rise of neoliberal markets in post-NAFTA Mexico. 
Primary readings subject to change. Conducted in Spanish in a jargon-free environment. Instructor: Rodriguez-
Garcia. One course.
590S. Seminar in Spanish Literature. FL Topics to be announced. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major
Majors are offered in French studies, Italian studies, Spanish, and Romance studies, and several different 

tracks are offered, as described below. The range of courses offered may be taken toward fulfillment of the 
following general education curriculum requirements: ALP, CZ, SS, CCI, EI, FL, STS, R, W, where indicated 
in the individual course entries. Majors are constituted of core courses and related courses. Core courses are 
departmental offerings taught in the language of the major. Related courses may be taken outside the department 
and not in the language of the major. 

Brazilian and Global Portuguese Studies Major Requirements
Students majoring in Brazilian and Global Portuguese studies will acquire competency in spoken and written 

Portuguese, as well as familiarity with the literature and culture of Brazil and Portuguese-speaking regions. A 
total of ten courses, at least eight of which must be at the 300-level or above. (Courses below the 300-level are 
restricted to Portuguese 203 or 203A, and 204, and to pre-approved Brazil-themed Thompson Writing Program 
courses). Six of the ten courses must be taught in Portuguese, or have a Portuguese preceptorial (P) component 
(taught in Portuguese). The four remaining courses may be taught in English, such as courses in the English-
language offerings of Romance studies, or cross-listed courses with at least fifty percent of Brazilian or lusophone 
content offered by other departments or programs such as history, African and African American studies, arts 
of the moving image, cultural anthropology, English, international comparative area studies, literature, music, 
political science, religious studies, and theater studies. Duke-approved courses taught in Portuguese in study 
abroad programs may also count toward this major concentration. Consult with the undergraduate major advisor 
concerning approval of related courses.

French Studies Major Requirements
Students majoring in French will acquire a considerable degree of competence in the written and 

spoken language as well as knowledge of the literature and culture of France and the French-speaking world. 
The department offers a wide array of courses in language, literature, and culture, and strongly encourages 
interdisciplinary work in French through courses emphasizing the relation between literature, the arts, history, 
and society. A major in French is an excellent portal to a variety of careers in the humanities, the economic world, 
government, and science, and to a lifetime of global awareness and cultural reflection. An honors thesis option 
is available, including the possibility for theses interweaving two fields for students pursuing double or second 
majors. Students interested in majoring in French should consult the director of undergraduate studies.

The French studies major requires a total of ten courses. At least eight French courses must be taken at the 
300 level or above. Depending on placement, French 203 and/or French 204 may count toward the requirement;2 
for students entering with 300-level proficiency, all ten French courses will be at the 300 level or above.

Of these advanced-proficiency courses:
• Students may take up to two Romance studies courses with French-related content or nondepartmental 

courses with French-related content

2 For transfer students, consult with the director of the language program for equivalent transfer credits.



Spanish (SPANISH)  747

• Students must take at least three French courses numbered above 4003 or complete a thesis.4

Italian Studies Major Requirements
The Italian studies major offers two concentrations: Italian studies and Italian and European studies.
Students majoring in Italian develop language skills in their social and cultural contexts. The combination 

of linguistic and cultural competency is excellent preparation for a variety of professional careers in business, 
government, the humanities, and science. Double (second) majors are encouraged and supported. Numerous 
opportunities are available, including programs of study abroad, work study, interdisciplinary programs, and 
Fulbright. Students interested in majoring in Italian should consult the director of undergraduate studies.

Italian Studies: A total of ten courses, at least eight of which must be at the 300 level or above. (Courses 
below the 300 level are restricted to Italian 213, Italian 203, and Italian 204). Six of the ten courses must be taught 
in Italian, or have an Italian preceptorial (P) component (taught in Italian) and include at least one course in each 
of the following areas: Medieval, Renaissance, Modern/Contemporary, Linguistics. The four remaining courses 
may be taught in English, such as courses in Romance studies, or cross-listed courses with Italian content offered 
by other departments or programs such as art history, cultural anthropology, English, arts of the moving image, 
history, international comparative area studies, literature, medieval and renaissance studies, music, philosophy, 
political science, religion, and theater studies. Duke-approved courses taught in Italian in study abroad programs 
may also count toward this major concentration.

Italian and European Studies: An interdisciplinary concentration requiring a total of ten courses, at 
least eight of which must be at the 300 level or above. (Courses below the 300 level are restricted to Italian 213, 
Italian 203, and Italian 204). Five of the ten courses must be taught in Italian, or with an Italian preceptorial 
(P) component (taught in Italian), and include at least one course from two of the following areas: Medieval, 
Renaissance, Modern/Contemporary, Linguistics. Five related courses on any Italian and/or European topic may 
be taken in or outside the department and not in the language of the major (consult the undergraduate major 
advisor for approval of related courses). Duke-approved courses taught in Italian in study abroad programs may 
also count toward this major concentration.

Spanish, Latin American & Latino/a Studies Major Requirements
A total of ten courses at the 300 level and above, at least seven of which must be from departmental offerings. 

These seven core courses must include any two survey courses (332, 333, 334, 335) and at least three courses 
numbered above 400. The remaining courses must be on peninsular, Latin American or Latino-related topics 
and may be taken either in the department or in other departments. Brazilian or Lusophone literature or culture 
courses taught in Portuguese at or above the 300 level, offered by the department, may be substituted for some of 
these remaining courses. Overall, a total of seven courses must be taught in Spanish. Consult the undergraduate 
major advisor concerning approved related courses.

Romance Studies Major Requirements
The Romance studies major at Duke involves advanced study in two of the department’s language/culture 

sections in an international and experiential learning mode. This major consists of foreign language study at the 
major level, departmental FL courses only, within two departmental fields, such as two continental fields, for 
example peninsular Spanish and Italian; two fields encompassing the diversity of cultures and engagement in the 
“developing” and the “developed” worlds, such Creole and French; or in geographically proximate postcolonial 
spaces such as lusophone (Portuguese-speaking) and francophone Africa, or Spanish and Portuguese-speaking 
environments in South America. The course requirements are paired with international/experiential learning 
requirements.

Course Requirements
• Five major-level departmental FL courses, in each of the two fields of study (see the descriptions of the 

single-language majors). The entry-level course for credit in the Romance studies major is the same as 
the entry level course for the minor in each of the French, Italian, and Spanish fields, i.e.:

• French 204
• Italian 203
• Spanish 301

3 500-600 level courses will be constructed with the undergraduate experience in mind and students are warmly 
welcome to take more than one 500-600 level course. Such courses also present an excellent opportunity for 
undergraduates to work with a graduate student peer cohort.

4 French majors are encouraged to write a senior thesis, and to consider interdisciplinary topics capable of linking French 
studies to their additional fields of academic interest.



 Spanish (SPANISH) 748

Students with unusual depth of study in Creole or Portuguese may petition the Romance studies faculty 
to unite one of the above sequences of five FL departmental courses with a combination of three courses and a 
required thesis (involving two semesters of independent study courses) in Creole or Portuguese. The Romance 
studies major in French, Italian, or Spanish and Creole or Portuguese therefore requires unusual initiative and 
experience in the field of either Creole or Portuguese. Petitions to undertake this option must include a one-page 
abstract of the project, a bibliography, and the names of three committee members who have consented to serve 
on the thesis committee.

International/Experiential Learning Requirements for the Romance Studies Major
To ensure breadth and depth of learning and linguistic/cultural immersion, any student completing the 

Romance Studies major must also complete two of the following international and/or experiential learning 
experiences related to their fields of Romance study. Each of these must be approved by the director of 
undergraduate studies:

• study abroad (up to two programs may be counted;
• an appropriate DukeEngage or another Duke service and/or experiential learning program ;
• research experience related to the Romance language/culture field in a humanities lab, a fellowship, a 

research independent study, research assistantship, professional research environment, etc.; 
• an honor’s thesis uniting the two fields; or
• a certificate in a related field with content directly related to that of the fields of language/culture study.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Qualified students may apply for Graduation with Distinction. The application deadline is preregistration 

for the fall semester of the senior year. Students must find an appropriate faculty advisor to oversee the honors 
project. The thesis may be written in the language best suited to its likely audience, but students pursuing graduate 
study in a Romance studies field must write the thesis in the language of the area of study. Further information 
may be obtained from the director of undergraduate studies or the assistant to the director.

The Minor
Minors are offered in Brazilian and Global Portuguese, French, Italian, and Spanish studies. 

Brazilian and Global Portuguese Studies:
Requirements: A total of six courses from departmental Brazilian and Global Portuguese Studies 

offerings, three of which must be taught in Portuguese or include a preceptorial (P) component. Up to two courses 
in Portuguese below the 300 level may be counted (Portuguese 203, Portuguese 203A, Portuguese 204). Duke-
approved courses taught in Portuguese in study abroad programs may also count toward this minor concentration.

French Studies
Requirements: The French studies minor requires a total of five courses from departmental French 

offerings, at least four of which are at the 300 level or above. French 204 may count toward this requirement 
depending on placement.

Italian Studies
Requirements: A total of six courses from departmental Italian offerings, three of which must be taught 

in Italian or include a preceptorial (P) component, and must include at least one of the four core courses: Italian 
303S, 332, 333, 335. Two courses in Italian below the 300 level may be counted (restricted to Italian 203, 204, 
and 213). Duke-approved courses taught in Italian in study abroad programs may also count toward this minor 
concentration.

Majors and minors are also encouraged to take advantage of 500-600 level course offerings.

Spanish Studies
Requirements: A total of five courses from departmental Spanish offerings numbered 300 or above. 

Courses for the minor must include one survey course (Spanish 332, 333, 334, 335) and at least two courses at the 
400 level or above. All five courses must be taught in Spanish (but Spanish 490S-2 may substitute for one of the 
five FL courses).



Spanish (SPANISH)  749

Study Abroad
Students are strongly urged to study abroad since this is the best way to achieve language proficiency and 

to acquire knowledge of a country’s culture. Courses taken abroad count toward the core and/or related courses 
as follows:

Department-Administered Programs
• Duke-in-France. Major: All courses may be counted toward the major. A maximum of three courses 

per semester may be counted toward the core-course requirement. Minor: A maximum of two courses 
per semester may be counted.

• Duke-in-Madrid. Major: All courses may be counted toward the major. Credit distribution may 
vary according to students’ needs, with a maximum of three courses counting toward the core course 
requirement. For students remaining a second semester, two additional courses may be counted as 
core courses; the rest may be counted as related courses. Minor: a maximum of two courses may be 
counted.

• Duke-in-Madrid-Intermediate. Major or Minor: Spanish 314A, Gastronomía de España, counts as 
one course.

Duke-Administered Semester Programs (Office of Study Abroad)
• Duke-Administered Semester Programs in English (Duke in-Florence; Duke-in-Venice). 

Major: a maximum of three courses per semester may be counted as related courses. Minor: A 
maximum of one course may be counted toward the core-course requirement.

Non-Duke-Administered Semester Programs
• Major: A maximum of two courses per semester may be counted toward the core-course requirement. 

Minor: One course per semester may be counted.

Non-Duke-Administered Semester Programs in Italy (Taught in Italian)
• Major: A maximum of two courses per semester may count toward the core-course requirement and a 

maximum of one may count as a related course. Minor: a maximum of two courses per semester may 
count.

Duke-Administered Summer Programs (Office of Study Abroad)
• Duke-Administered Summer Programs in the Language 

• Duke-in-Aix-en-Provence. French 212A Intensive Intermediate French Language and Culture 
counts as two courses toward the major, one course toward the minor.

• Duke-in-Barcelona; Duke-in-Bologna; Duke-in-Spain. Major: Two courses may be counted 
toward the core-course requirement. Minor: Two courses may be counted.

• Duke-in-Paris. Major: Two courses may be counted toward the core-course requirement. Minor: 
Two courses may be counted.

• Duke-in-Brazil. Major: Two courses may be counted.
• Duke-in-Mexico. Intensive Elementary & Intermediate Spanish
• Duke-in-Montréal. Major: One course may be counted toward the core-course requirement. 

Minor: One course may be counted.
• Duke-Administered Summer Programs in English (Duke-in-Venice). Major or Minor: One 

course may be counted toward the core-course requirement.

Non-Duke-Administered Summer Programs
• Major: One course may be counted toward the core-course requirement. Minor: One course may be 

counted.

Russian
For courses in Russian, see Slavic and Eurasian Studies on page 761.



 Science & Society (SCISOC)750

Science & Society
Professor Angrist, Director of the Science & Society Certificate; Professor Farahany, Science & Society Director 
and Director of Undergraduate Studies

A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program.
The Science & Society Program is an undergraduate, interdisciplinary course of study that integrates science 

with its relationship to society. The interdisciplinary curriculum enables students to understand the social, legal, 
historical, and policy issues stemming from research and technological advances in both basic and applied science. 
In earning the certificate, students learn how to integrate different perspectives, consider ethical and policy issues, 
and address the societal implications of advances in science and related technologies. 

Certificate Requirements
Undergraduate students must complete five courses and two research experiences, (at least one of which is 

credit bearing): 
• Science & Society 256/GENOME 256 (core course) must be taken by the end of the junior year.
• Three elective courses (see current listings at https://scienceandsociety.duke.edu/learn/

undergraduate-programs/ss-certificate/), including at least one course with an ethics, law, or policy 
component. 

• Two approved research experiences consisting of either two semester long independent study courses 
or one semester long independent study course plus one approved summer research experience.

• Science & Society 498S/Genome 498S capstone course to be taken in the spring of senior year.
At least one elective and at least one research experience must have a science component, and at least one 

elective must have an ethics, law, or policy component. No more than three courses may originate in any one 
department; only two courses may be used to satisfy the requirements for any major, minor, or other certificate; 
and at least half the courses must be taken at Duke.

Courses in Science & Society (SCISOC)
112FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see 
Education 112FS; also C-L: Public Policy 183FS, Russian 121FS, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 112FS, Human Rights
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science. CCI, CZ, STS One 
course. C-L: see History 106; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 118, International Comparative 
Studies, Energy and the Environment, Ethics Elective
140FS. On Suffering: How Science and Stories Shape Us. ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
140FS; also C-L: Global Health 140FS, Sociology 140FS
153FS. Drugs and the Law. SS One course. C-L: see Neuroscience 153FS; also C-L: Public Policy 185FS
156. Genetics, Genomics, and Society: Implications for the 21st Century. EI, NS, SS, 
STS Introduction to the foundation of genomic sciences with an emphasis on recent advances and their social, 
ethical and policy implications. Foundational topics including DNA, proteins, genome organization, gene 
expression, and genetic variation will be interwoven with contemporary issues emanating from the genome 
revolution such as pharmacogenetics, genetic discrimination, genomics of race, genetically modified crops, and 
genomic testing. Genomic sciences and policy science applied to present and future societal, and particularly 
ethical, concerns related to genomics. Intended for non-Biology majors. Not open to students who have taken 
Biology 210FS, 201L or 202L. Instructor: Hill. One course. C-L: Marine Science and Conservation
165. Introduction to the United States Health Care System. SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 165
165FS. Cryptography and Society. QS, STS, W One course. C-L: see Mathematics 165FS
189FS. To Boldly Go! Global Health and the American Way of Engagement. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One 
course. C-L: see Global Health 189FS
194FS. Science in Pop Culture. Since the dawning of the “pop culture” era (however one defines that), 
science and popular culture have been inextricably linked. This course will explore the relationship between the 
two, examining how science is, and has historically been portrayed through pop culture outlets, such as film, 
television, music, videogames, fashion, sports, and news/politics. It will examine how these portrayals of science 

https://scienceandsociety.duke.edu/learn/undergraduate-programs/ss-certificate/
https://scienceandsociety.duke.edu/learn/undergraduate-programs/ss-certificate/


Science & Society (SCISOC) 751

have affected public perception of, and support for science, as well as how the pop culture media have affected 
the “doing” of science. Conversely, it will explore how scientific/technological advances have formed and shaped 
pop culture. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Weintraub. Half course.
195FS. Medical Instrumentation in the Developing World (GE). STS One course. C-L: see Biomedical 
Engineering 195FS
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W In the 1960s, patients 
appropriated the language and tactics of the civil rights movement to advance clinical and research agendas. 
Today patient activism is evolving, leading to new solutions, dilemmas, and organizational structures. This 
course will examine patient and research participant activism and the ways it challenges conventional notions of 
expertise, amateurism, “human subjects protections,” and minimization of risk. Students will bring the tools of 
journalism, anthropology, humanities scholarship, public policy and community engagement/citizen science to 
bear on ethical and policy questions. Open only to students in the Science & the Public Focus Program cluster. 
Department consent required. Instructor: Angrist. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 196FS, 
Global Health 196FS, Psychology 196FS, Public Policy 196FS, Sociology 196FS, Cultural Anthropology 196FS
197FS. From Siri to Skynet: Our Complex Relationships with Technology. SS, STS From mobile 
phones to driverless cars, modern high-tech devices have human-facing elements that shape our relationships 
with technology. Some integrate seamlessly into our daily lives, others frustrate us, and some simply captivate 
us. Students will investigate the intersection between people and technology to better understand how design 
can influence performance, safety, and user satisfaction. Topics include design principles; user experience 
concepts; and an overview of human strengths and limitations influencing interactions with technology. Case 
studies will include various technologies, including emerging systems such as brain-computer interfaces, 
robotics and artificial intelligence. Open only to students in Focus program. Department consent required. 
Instructor: Lyon. One course.
198FS. Performing Science: Experimentation, Collaboration, and Artistry. ALP, R, STS Combines 
a historical survey of science-themed plays with an examination of sci+arts initiatives such as the University 
of Western Australia’s Symbiotica; the Art & Science Laboratory in New Mexico; and the UK’s Centre for 
Performance Science. Central course questions: How can performing arts improve public awareness and 
knowledge about complex scientific ideas and research? What points of view and methods of research do artists 
bring to scientific inquiry and vice-versa? We will pay particular attention to secondary schools, contemporary 
art installations, and science museums as public laboratories for experimental, embodied collaborations across 
the two disciplines. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. Instructor: 
Odendahl-James. One course. C-L: Literature 198FS, English 198FS, Theater Studies 198FS
199FS. Risks, Rewards, Rules, and Tools: Science Law and Policy. CCI, SS, STS, W What are the 
government policies that support science? How is science regulated and controlled? What can science contribute 
to law and policy? How do the states and the federal government interact to set science policy? How do disparate 
regulations and law impact research and translation? How is scientific research funded? Why is there so much 
distrust of science? How is risk and uncertainty managed? We will explore these questions and more by looking 
at the various interactions of law, science, and policy. Open only to students in Focus Program. Department 
consent required. Instructor: Waitzkin. One course. C-L: Public Policy 199FS
201. Science, Media, & Perception: How Media Affects Our View of Science. SS, STS Examination 
of how media affects people’s perception of science. Explore how people consume scientific content and develop 
their perception, linked to the “gap” between science and the public, and how we make our choices and beliefs; 
discuss different forms of science communication and media, the effects of media manipulation, and how these 
impact society; analyze current coverage of breaking scientific topics and public perception; and evaluate the 
effects these have on people’s perception of science, value judgements, and decision making. Ultimately leading 
to the development and proposal of guidelines to reduce issues we see regarding media coverage of science. 
Instructor: Eily. One course.
205. Science, Technology, Ethics, and Masculinity in American Culture. CCI, CZ, EI, STS Considers 
ethical assumptions constituting “common sense” in the U.S. about masculinity, warfare, sports, and sex. 
Reviews history of scientific technology relating to myths and morality of militarism, athleticism, and virility. 
Anchoring analyses are Stiffed (Susan Faludi, 672 pp) and “Bigger, Stronger, Faster” (Chris Bell). Students 
write weekly close-reading papers (3 pp.) on a primary document, including images and text. Course helps 



 Science & Society (SCISOC)752

students connect humanities research with work in “hard” sciences and understand the imperative in bioethics 
to question what counts as normal in science, nationalism, and what makes a man a man. Instructor: Hall. One 
course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 205
210S. Stigma, Mental Illness and Ethnicity: From News Media and Pop Culture to Policy and 
Back. EI, SS, STS Stigma associated with mental illness, ethnicity and/or race affects individuals, families, 
communities and societies. This course offers cultural perspectives on how stigma associated with ethnicity, race 
and mental illness impacts and is impacted by media and pop culture. The course is designed for undergraduate 
students interested in understanding the complexity and social implications of stigma through analysis of media 
and pop culture. Assignments include short essays and podcast production. Instructor: Chiscop Head. One 
course.
212FS. Law, Ethics & Responsibility. EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 212FS; also C-L: Public 
Policy 250FS
238S. Influential Scientists and Policy Leaders in Science Policy. SS, STS, W Explores role of 
scientist and non-scientist policy-makers and elected officials who have substantially shaped U.S. science 
research and application of scientific discoveries throughout the 20th century from within and outside the 
federal government. Science policies examined in larger context of political, cultural, and social events. 
Instructor: Haga. One course. C-L: Public Policy 233S, History 301S
248. Science and Policy of Obesity. SS, STS An interdisciplinary course introducing students to science 
and policy of obesity from historical perspective beginning in mid-19th century. Study how social and cultural 
changes contributed to increasing prevalence of obesity in U.S. as well as how scientific advancements in human 
physiology, nutrition, and genetics have come to define current biological causes of obesity and how evidence 
has impacted social policies, local and national legislation and medical practices. Students would strongly 
benefit from general background in biology as well as molecular biology and genetics. Instructor: Haga. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 348
256. Science and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS, W Case-based studies of scientific issues. Gives equal time to 
discussion of social, legal and policy issues stemming from novel scientific and technological discovery. Students 
will develop a final paper addressing the science and societal impact of a relevant topic. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Angrist. One course.
258D. Race, Genomics, and Society. EI, NS, SS, STS One course. C-L: see African & African American 
Studies 261D; also C-L: Global Health 258D, Cultural Anthropology 261D, Biology 261D, Visual and Media 
Studies 274D
260. Magic, Religion, and Science since 1400. CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see History 260; also 
C-L: Medieval and Renaissance Studies 287
268S. Law & Genomic Sciences. EI, SS, STS Introduction to ways genomics is affecting law and other 
social institutions, and, conversely, how laws in turn affect development and use of genomic knowledge. 
Examine legal, ethical and policy issues raised by medical applications of genetics, (genetic testing, screening, 
therapy); consider use and misuse of “genetics” during eugenics movement in America, (including legal system 
failure to protect individuals rights); examine issues raised by genetic research; and consider impact of genetic 
information on family law, criminal law, privacy rights, and employment. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290. Topics in Science & Society. Topics in science and society. Topics may vary. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290S. Special Topics in Genome Sciences. Topics in genome sciences and policy. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
293. Research Independent Study in Science & Society. R Individual research in a Science & Society 
topic of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive 
paper or written report containing specific analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Meets 
the research experience requirement for the Certificate in Science & Society as well as a Research (R) mode 
of inquiry curriculum requirement. Open to all qualified students with consent of supervising instructor and 
Director of SS Certificate. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
293-1. Research Independent Study in Science & Society. R Individual research in a Science & Society 



Science & Society (SCISOC) 753

topic of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive 
paper or written report containing specific analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Meets 
the research experience requirement for the Certificate in Science & Society as well as a Research (R) mode 
of inquiry curriculum requirement. Open to all qualified students with consent of supervising instructor and 
Director of Science & Society Certificate. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Research Independent Study in Science & Society. R Individual research in a Science & Society 
topic of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive 
paper or written report containing specific analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Meets 
the research experience requirement for the Certificate in Science & Society as well as a Research (R) mode 
of inquiry curriculum requirement. Open to all qualified students with consent of supervising instructor and 
Director of SS Certificate. May be repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
294-1. Research Independent Study in Science & Society. R Individual research in a Science & Society 
topic of special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive 
paper or written report containing specific analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Meets 
the research experience requirement for the Certificate in Science & Society as well as a Research (R) mode of 
inquiry curriculum requirement. Open to all qualified students with consent of supervising instructor. May be 
repeated. Instructor: Staff. One course.
299L. Introduction to Landscape Archaeology and Cultural Landscapes. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: 
see Classical Studies 299L
303. Rise of Modern Science: Newton to Einstein. CZ, STS, W One course. C-L: see History 303
337. French Scientists Write. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 337
341. Ethics of Global Infectious Disease Control. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 341; 
also C-L: International Comparative Studies 299, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 341, 
Human Rights
369. History of Public Health in America. CZ, R, STS One course. C-L: see History 369
371. Feast and Famine: Food in Global History. CCI, CZ, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 371
380S. The Scientific Revolution. CZ, STS, W One course. C-L: see Philosophy 380S; also C-L: History 
388S
390. Advanced Topics in Science & Society. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390-1. Lectures on Special Topics in Science & Society. The course will look to explore how the topics 
of bioethics and technology are integrated into our everyday life. The course will aim to bring in experts from 
different fields to discuss how these areas affect society as a whole. Additionally, students will play a role in 
leading class discussions by presenting information to the class, and bringing in others to speak. Instructor: 
Waitzkin, Krenzer. Half course.
390S. Special Topics in Science & Society. Topics will vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
417S. Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Biology 417S
439S. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 473S; also C-L: 
Russian 439S, Neuroscience 439S
490. Special Topics in Genome Sciences. Topics in genome sciences and policy. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
498S. Science & Society Capstone. EI, NS, R, SS, STS Create and apply knowledge gained through 
certificate course work and research experiences in an intensive, interdisciplinary, small group setting. Students 
work in small teams learning to analyze current issues in science and society and to consider the issue from 
scientific, social, and ethical perspectives, often for the benefit of a real-world client. Teams will present their 
research as an oral and/or written final project. Open only to graduating seniors in the Science and Society 
program or by consent of instructor. Instructor: Angrist. One course.
502S. Communicating Science & Bioethics. STS Examination of the challenges and best practices for 
communicating scientific and bioethical issues to the public, journalists, and policymakers. Explores historical 



 Science & Society (SCISOC)754

and cultural factors that influence public understanding of and attitudes toward scientific and bioethical issues. 
Students will draw on communication case studies from a variety of disciplines (genetics, neuroscience, law, 
bioethics) and their own academic interests as a context for developing writing and speaking skills essential for 
clear communication of complex topics to non-specialists. Instructor: Weintraub. One course. C-L: Bioethics 
and Science Policy 502S
519. International Development and Technology: The Benefits and Risks of Promoting 
Digitalization. Technology has the potential to be a great equalizer, facilitating educational, economic and 
creative opportunities for individuals no matter where they live. Unfortunately much of the world still lacks 
reliable access to technology and the internet, leading to a digital divide and sharper inequalities. This course 
will explore such attempts to harness technology to be a force for development, while also highlighting the 
potential risks associated with the rise of technology related to data collection, privacy and security, bias and 
more. Students will evaluate case studies to better understand which factors should be in place to ensure the 
success of “tech for development” strategies. Instructor: Lynch, Perault. One course. C-L: Public Policy 519
549S. Histories of Science and Technology. CCI, CZ, SS, STS One course. C-L: see History 549S; also 
C-L: Global Health 549S, Energy and the Environment
559. Foundational Statistics for Social Science Researchers. Foundational knowledge in statistical 
procedures are necessary for interpreting and describing the results of research within science. This course is 
designed to provide the foundational knowledge of research methodologies and the statistical concepts and tools 
that will allow one to understand scholarly research. Specifically, in this course you will learn the theoretical 
and practical use of several descriptive and inferential statistical procedures, as well as how to design strong 
methodological experiments. Additionally, this course will allow you to conduct basic data analysis and prepare 
you to better understand research as a whole. Instructor: Krenzer. One course.
590. Special Topics in Science & Society. Topics will vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Science & Society. Topics will vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
606S. Robots in Society. From drones to self-driving cars, robotic technologies are developing faster than 
society’s ability to fully grasp their impact. Well-designed technology has the ability to make us safer and 
improve our productivity, but how does the complex relationship between innovators, policy-makers and the 
public influence how soon we can realize the benefits? Class is a mix of students from different backgrounds 
representing different stakeholder perspectives. Instructor: Staff. One course.
612. Ethics and Policy in Genomics. EI, R, SS Survey of ethical, social, economic, and legal issues in 
genomics. Introduction to ethical reasoning and examination of selected issues calling for such analysis, 
including: (1) special procedures for research involving human participants, (2) respect for privacy and 
confidentiality of genetic information; (3) historical and political background of health research funding, and (4) 
public-private research interactions such as intellectual property and conflict of interest. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Public Policy 634, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 612
613S. Technology Policy for the New Administration: Antirust, Speech and Other Emerging 
Issues. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 613S
627. Molecular Ecology. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Environment 627; also C-L: Biology 627
641S. Cancer in Our Lives: Film, Narrative, Fiction, History and Politics. EI, SS, STS One course. 
C-L: see Public Policy 641S
680S. Ethical Foundations of Innovative Technology Policy. EI, STS As science and technology 
continue to progress at an unparalleled pace, law, ethics and policy struggle to provide regulation and 
oversight. This course will consider the ethical foundations which can guide the development of public policy 
concerning innovative technologies, including gene editing, artificial intelligence, augmented and virtual reality, 
neuroscience and others not yet conceived. Instructor: Perault. One course. C-L: Public Policy 680S
690. Special Topics in Science & Ethics. The specific topic addressed in each course will vary, but 
will focus upon the ethical issues which arise in a selected area of innovative technology, such as artificial 
intelligence, gene editing, the impact of social media, big data and similar issues. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Genome Sciences and Policy (GENOME) 755

Courses in Genome Sciences and Policy (GENOME)
118FS. The Secrets of Life: DNA, Property Rights and Human Identity. EI, NS, SS, STS, 
W Exploration of DNA and all of its meanings: scientific, cultural, societal, legal, artistic. Course will begin 
with identification of DNA as genetic material and move forward to the current and future impact of personal 
genomics and whole-genome sequencing. Writing-intensive. Open only to students in the Focus program. 
Instructor: Angrist. One course.
123FS. Ethics, Law, and Policy in Genomics. EI, STS Course presents a survey of ethical, social, 
economic, and legal issues in genomics research and applications. Includes an introduction to ethical reasoning 
and examination of selected issues calling for such analysis, including: special procedures for research 
involving human participants, respect for privacy and confidentiality of genetic information, eugenics in the 
US, public trust in scientists, patents, commercialization and conflicts of interest sample and data ownership, 
personal genomics, dual-use concerns, impact on global health, and new applications for clinical sequencing 
and noninvasive prenatal testing. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
128FS. Evolutionary Genomics: Who Are We, Where Have We Been, and Where Are We Going?. 
NS, STS We are now a decade into the genomics revolution that generated data allowing us to gaze into our 
past, present, and future in ways that were beyond imagining when Darwin’s theory of Natural Selection was 
first introduced. The unification of genomic data, bioinformatics, and evolutionary theory has transformed our 
understanding of human history, our place within the Tree of Life, and the impact that our species is having 
on those with whom we share the planet. This course will use the primary literature to familiarize students 
with the multifaceted power of genomics, with a slant towards examining human history and disease from an 
evolutionary perspective. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Yoder. One course. C-L: 
Biology 128FS
138FS. Synthetic Genomics: Science, Policy and Ethics. EI, NS, SS, STS Explore both the science 
behind synthetic genomics as well as related policy and ethical issues raised by these new advancements. Begins 
with examination of science of synthetic genomics, focusing on key experiments, and integrates discussions on 
policy and ethical issues as the scientific field matured. Readings will include scientific publications, bioethical 
reports, government reports, and popular press. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor: Haga. 
One course. C-L: Public Policy 184FS
148FS. Genomics of Host-Microbe Interactions: The Symbiotic Web. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: 
see Environment 148FS; also C-L: Biology 148FS
190FS. Focus Program: Topics in Genome Sciences. One course.
212FS. Social Structures in an Evolutionary Framework. NS, STS One course. C-L: see Evolutionary 
Anthropology 212FS
222FS. Genetics and Epigenetics: The Codes that Control Our Genomes. NS One course. C-L: see 
Molecular Genetics & Microbiology 222FS
291. Bass Connections: Enabling Precision Medicine. This is an independent research study for 
undergraduate students interested in Genome Sciences and Policy. Enrollment in the course requires pre-
approved research topic and plan of study. Open only to students in the Bass Connections program. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Haga. One course.

Program Courses in Other Departments
African & African American Studies
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy
Biology
251L. Molecular Evolution
255. Philosophy of Biology
311. Systems Biology: An Introduction for the Quantitative Sciences
350. Complex Traits and Evolutionary Genetics
450S. Genomics of Adaptation: A Modern Look at Evolution
452S. Genes & Development
Biomedical Engineering
561L. Genome Science and Technology Lab (GE, MC)



 Genome Sciences and Policy (GENOME)756

Classical Studies
299L. Introduction to Landscape Archaeology and Cultural Landscapes
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics
520. Genome Tools and Technologies
561L. Genome Science and Technology Lab (GE, MC)
662. Computational Systems Biology
Computer Science
260. Introduction to Computational Genomics
662. Computational Systems Biology
Cultural Anthropology
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy
220FS. Global ‘Mixed Race’ Studies
220S. Global ‘Mixed Race’ Studies
Global Health
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy
302. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS
History
106. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
577S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute
302. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS
Information Science + Studies
670. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America
International Comparative Studies
118. Science and the Modern World: Introduction to the History of Science
295. Global Narratives of Living with HIV/AIDS
Linguistics
216FS. Neuroscience and Human Language
216S. Neuroscience and Human Language
Literature
521S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science
623. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America
Mathematics
168S. Mathematical Investigations in Genetics and Genomics
Neuroscience
116FS. Neuroscience and Human Language
116S. Neuroscience and Human Language
Philosophy
101. Introduction to Philosophy
218. Medical Ethics
314. Philosophy of Biology
541S. Historical and Philosophical Perspectives on Science
570. Body Works: Medicine, Technology, and the Body in Early Twenty-First Century America
Psychology
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy
681S. Genetics and Environment in Abnormal Behavior
Public Policy
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy
Russian
216S. Neuroscience and Human Language
Sociology
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy

Study of Sexualities
For courses in the study of sexualities, see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies on page 404. 

Slavic and Eurasian Studies
Associate Professor Gheith, Chair; Professor Andrews, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Andrews 
and Holmgren; Associate Professors Gheith and Tuna; Professors of the Practice Apollonio, Maksimova, and 
McAuliffe; Associate Professor of the Practice Van Tuyl; Affiliated Faculty: Professor Miller (History); Associate 
Professor Hacohen (History); Visiting Professor Newcity; Adjunct Assistant Professor Zitser; Research Professor 
Becker (Economics)

Two majors and three minors are available in this department.



Slavic and Eurasian Studies (SES)  757

The Department of Slavic and Eurasian Studies has a strong commitment to increase the language 
proficiency of its students regardless of their level at matriculation, to facilitate deep knowledge of the cultural 
context of each language represented, to help students develop their own scholarly interests and research abilities, 
and to acquaint students with trends in literary, linguistic, and cultural theory. Areas of specialization include 
nineteenth- and twentieth-century Russian and Soviet literature, Polish language and literature, semiotics, gender 
studies, film and media studies, legal and business Russian language, translation, Slavic linguistics, contemporary 
Russian and Polish literature, scientific and scholarly Russian language, stylistics, and Russian and Polish cultural 
history. Languages taught include Russian, Polish, and Romanian.

Resources for study include a state-of-the-art language laboratory with video facilities and a humanities 
computing facility, reception of daily Russian television programming, and an exchange program with St. 
Petersburg University. The department offers several Focus seminars and maintains a cooperative relationship 
with Duke programs in Linguistics, Global Cultural Studies in Literature, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies, 
and Cultural Anthropology; the Center for Slavic, Eurasian and East European Studies; and related programs at 
The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. 

Courses in Slavic and Eurasian Studies (SES) 
190A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Slavic and Eurasian Studies. Topics 
vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
209FS. Geopolitics and Culture from ISIS to Afghanistan. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 208FS; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 211FS
215FS. The Politics of Language. SS Examines the political role of language in societies as diverse as China, 
India, the former Soviet Union, the UK and the US. Looks at how state and non-state actors influence citizens’ 
language practices, and their beliefs about language. Drawing on political theory, sociology and sociolinguistics, 
we look at how language policies reflect and produce sociopolitical realities. Topics covered include migration, 
citizenship, nationalism and decolonization. Open to students in the Focus Program only. Instructor: Price. One 
course. C-L: Political Science 185FS, Linguistics 213FS, International Comparative Studies 228FS
240S. Around the Bloc: Cold War Culture in the USSR and Eastern Europe. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Drawing on oral and written history, memoirs, film, fiction, and essays in anthropology and sociology, we’ll 
resist the black/white readings imposed by the Iron Curtain and explore the dreams, fears, ethical concerns, 
cultural trends, and lifestyles of Cold War baby boomers in the USSR, Poland, Czechoslovakia, and Romania. 
Highlighted topics include: the privileges and discontents of postwar youth, the atomic age and its mutations, 
adventures in socialist consumer culture, gender politics and real life, making art about the socialist state of the 
absurd. All texts in English translation, films screened with English subtitles. Instructor: Holmgren. One course. 
C-L: Literature 241S, Cultural Anthropology 259S
250FS. Alien America: Immigrant Experiences in Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI The oft-
used term “melting pot” misrepresents what happened to the cultures of the many different immigrants who 
settled in the United States over the last 250 years. Each new immigrant group faced tough challenges-- the 
achievement of equal civil rights, the rise out of poverty and winning of broader social acceptance. Individual 
immigrants had to decide if and how they can preserve their native cultures vis-à-vis notions of the “real 
American” debated in politics, taught in school, and broadcast in the media. Our course addresses these key 
issues as they are raised in memoirs, fiction, and film. No prerequisites. Readings in English, films in English/
with subtitles. Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Literature 250FS
267S. Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 267S; also C-L: Russian 267S, Public 
Policy 267S, Sociology 267S, Study of Ethics 267S, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
270. Spies Like Us: Screening Cold War Espionage. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI When the Cold War erupted in 
the wake of World War II, filmmakers were poised to screen it as propaganda, entertainment (thriller, horror, 
science fiction), and morally reflective realism. This course explores the films/television series produced on both 
sides of the Iron Curtain as well as those made after the Cold War (post-1989). Discussion will focus on ethical 
justifications and critiques of espionage; the characterizations of the spy and those spied on, and the interactions 
between these protagonists; and the changing aesthetics of screening espionage. Instructor: Holmgren. One 
course. C-L: Literature 225, International Comparative Studies 262, Visual and Media Studies 258
279FS. Turkey: Muslim and Modern. CCI, CZ, SS Turkish history from the 18th century to the present. 



 Slavic and Eurasian Studies (SES) 758

Turkey as strategic ally of the US; candidate for membership in European Union; first Muslim country to adopt 
democracy, secularism, and Westernization, and as political, cultural, and economic model for other Muslim 
countries. Focus on Turkish people’s encounter with modernity as Muslims; questions about contradictions and 
promises of Muslim and modern experience; informed consideration of Islam’s encounter with the West. No 
prerequisites. No knowledge of Turkish required. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: History 239FS, Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 179FS, Islamic Studies
279S. Turkey: Muslim and Modern. CCI, CZ, SS Turkish history from the 18th century to the present. 
Turkey as strategic ally of the US; candidate for membership in European Union; first Muslim country to adopt 
democracy, secularism, and Westernization, and as political, cultural, and economic model for other Muslim 
countries. Focus on Turkish people’s encounter with modernity as Muslims; questions about contradictions 
and promises of Muslim and modern experience; informed consideration of Islam’s encounter with the West. 
No prerequisites. No knowledge of Turkish required. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: History 239S, Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 179S
287. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 186; also C-L: Religion 228, History 212, Islamic Studies
288S. Trauma and Nostalgia: East European Film in the 21st Century. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines 
the major thematic focus of East European filmmakers in the 21st century: their efforts to reconstruct and 
reassess the experience of the Cold War (1945-1989) and the Yugoslav wars (1991-1995). These films from the 
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Croatia, and Serbia include ironic/sentimental tales of Cold War 
childhood, thrillers about sleeping with the enemy (political informers), and psychological dramas centering 
on political trauma, resistance, and compromise. All films shown with English subtitles. No prerequisites. 
Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Polish 288S, Literature 216S, Visual and Media Studies 284S, 
International Comparative Studies 288S
290. Special Topics in Slavic and Eurasian Studies. Subject varies from semester to semester. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
290A. Special Topics in Slavic and Eurasian Studies. Subject varies from semester to semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
290A-1. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Turkish Studies. Special Topics in 
Turkish Studies. Topics vary by course or section. Consent of department required. Instructor: Tuna. One 
course.
290S. Special Topics in Slavic and Eurasian Studies. Subject varies from semester to semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
342A. Between Europe and Asia: The Geopolitics of Istanbul From Occupation To Globalization. 
CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 389A
356. The Russian Empire. CCI, CZ, SS Russian imperial history from Peter the Great to Bolshevik 
Revolution: 1700-1917. Focus on formation and governance of multiethnic and multiconfessional Russian 
empire. Traces expansion of land-locked city state (Muscovy) into world power ruling from Eastern Europe to 
Alaska. Questions implications of Russia’s world-power status. Examines institutions of governance that created 
this empire and held its various ethnic, religious and ideological groups together for centuries. Readings of 
English translations of works of Russian literature and historiographic analyses aimed at developing a sound 
grounding in Russian imperial history and culture. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: Russian 356, History 275
370S. Islam in Asia. CCI, CZ, SS Focus on the northern tier of Muslim-inhabited lands. The early spread of 
Islam among continental Asia’s non-Arab peoples. The evolution of Muslim religious and cultural institutions 
under Mongol, Central Asian, Russian and Chinese empires. Asian Muslim encounters with European modernity 
and experience of Muslims under and after Soviet/Chinese socialist regimes. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: 
History 209S, Religion 378S, Russian 370S, International Comparative Studies 370S, Islamic Studies
373S. Between Moscow, Beijing and Delhi: Narratives of Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, R, SS Exercise 
in reconstructing Eurasian history from the 13th century Mongol invasions to post-Soviet era through critical 
reading of eyewitness accounts—travel notes and memoirs. Reflects on political, religious, and cultural 
evolution, expansion, and rivalry as well as cross-cultural and trans-regional exchange. Instructor: Tuna. One 



Slavic and Eurasian Studies (SES)  759

course. C-L: History 216S, International Comparative Studies 373S, Islamic Studies
375S. Social Engineering and Social Movements in Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, EI, 
SS Combining perspectives of political sociology and history, this course questions the respective roles of state 
policies and social movements in transforming societies. Explores concepts such as social engineering, violence, 
revolution, totalitarianism, social movements, non-violent resistance, collective action and many others in 
historically-informed case studies of: colonialism/anticolonial movements (passive resistance and nationalism) 
in India; revolutionary communism, socialist reconstruction of society, everyday resistance and collective 
dissent in the Soviet Bloc; authoritarian capitalism and dissent in the form of environmentalist and anti-
corruption movements in post-Maoist China. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: History 333S, Political Science 
359S, Public Policy 282S
385. Language and Society. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see English 395; also C-L: Linguistics 451, Cultural 
Anthropology 212, International Comparative Studies 395, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 395, Human Rights
388S. Illiberal Nondemocracies: Focus on Eastern Europe and Asia. CCI, CZ, SS As of 2016, only 
11% of the countries in the world are liberal democracies. Some insight about how illiberal regimes function is 
a must to understand what is going on in the world. In this course, we explore illiberal and/or nondemocratic 
regimes of Eastern Europe and Asia—a perfect laboratory for the subject. We develop nuanced ideas about key 
concepts such as elections, representation, party rule, dictatorship, populism, patronalism, authoritarianism, 
and totalitarianism as well as the dilemmas of freedom, security, corruption, and development. We study the 
regimes of countries such as Hungary, Russia, Turkey, China and follow the news to see how political regimes 
evolve in real time. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: History 331S, International Comparative Studies 346S, 
Political Science 301S, Public Policy 317S
396S. Language in Immigrant America. ALP, CCI, R One course. C-L: see English 396S; also C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 397S, Linguistics 396S, International Comparative Studies 396S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 396S, Human Rights
420S. Capstone Seminar: Russia-USSR-Russia: History of Communism. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One 
course. C-L: see History 467S; also C-L: Political Science 445S
423S. City Stories, Eastern Europe: Prague, Warsaw, Budapest, Sarajevo. CCI, CZ, SS Explores the 
multicultural histories, landmarks, and architectural styles of these four major European capitals. Drawing on 
paintings, photos, films, histories, memoirs, and fiction, we’ll trace the aesthetic, religious, and political imprints 
of overlapping empires—Hapsburg, Russian, Ottoman, and Soviet—on these fascinating cities; consider how 
their urban communities accommodated influential religious minorities (Jews, Muslims, Christians); and study 
the roles they played in their respective nations. All readings in English translation and films screened with 
English subtitles. Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies 423S, Visual and 
Media Studies 423S
433S. Soviet Life through the Camera’s Lens. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL An in-depth look at images and 
representations of Soviet life through Soviet and Russian film. Film texts include films shown in theatres, 
television films and forbidden films/films with a very limited distribution. Emphasis on the period from the mid-
1970s through 1991. Course taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 301S or equivalent or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Maksimova. One course. C-L: Russian 433S, Visual and Media Studies 435S
468S. Capstone Seminar: Literature & Terrorism. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: see History 
468S
484S. Language and Politics: Global Perspectives. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 471S; also 
C-L: Sociology 471S, Public Policy 208S
490. Special Topics in Slavic and Eurasian Studies. Subject varies from semester to semester. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Slavic and Eurasian Studies. Subject varies every semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
491. Independent Study. Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision of a faculty 
member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and 



  (BALTFIN)760

interpretation of a previously approved topic. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
564. Russian and Slavic Linguistics. SS Emphasis on synchronic linguistic theory focusing on East 
Slavic and Russian, but including diachronic approaches, and West and South Slavic languages. Focus on 
phonological, morphological, semantic and syntactic structures of Contemporary Standard Russian and modern 
Slavic languages. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Russian 564, Linguistics 564
596S. Borderland and Battleground: A Journey Through Twentieth-Century Eastern Europe. 
ALP, CCI, CZ Explores through history, film, fiction, and memoirs the “extreme” political experience, hybrid 
ethnic identities, and stunning art and testimony of twentieth-century Central and Eastern European cultures, 
including Poland, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Romania, and Yugoslavia. Traces the emergence of new nation 
states in the region at the end of World War I, the rise of Nazism and Stalinism, the devastating experience of 
World War II, and the absurdist mix of politics and daily life in Eastern Europe from 1945 until the fall of the 
Berlin Wall. Graduate level version of SES 386S; undergraduates may enroll only with permission of instructor. 
Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Literature 511S
674S. Orhan Pamuk and World Literature. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Asian & Middle 
Eastern Studies 674S
683S. The City of Two Continents: Istanbul in Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. 
C-L: see Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 683S; also C-L: Islamic Studies
687. The Turks: From Ottoman Empire to European Union. CCI, R One course. C-L: see Asian & 
Middle Eastern Studies 687; also C-L: Islamic Studies

Balto-Finnic

Course in Balto-Finnic (BALTFIN)
490AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Balto-Finnic. Topics differ 
by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Polish

Courses in Polish (POLISH)
101. Elementary Polish. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Polish. No 
preliminary knowledge of Polish necessary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Elementary Polish. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, and writing Polish. No 
preliminary knowledge of Polish necessary. Second half of Polish 101,102. Prerequisite: Polish 101. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
203. Intermediate Polish. FL Intensive classroom and laboratory practice in spoken and written patterns. 
Readings in contemporary literature. Prerequisites: Polish 101 and 102, or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
204. Intermediate Polish. FL Continuation of Polish 203. Prerequisite: Polish 203 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
288S. Trauma and Nostalgia: East European Film in the 21st Century. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines 
the major thematic focus of East European filmmakers in the 21st century: their efforts to reconstruct and 
reassess the experience of the Cold War (1945-1989) and the Yugoslav wars (1991-1995). These films from the 
Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, Croatia, and Serbia include ironic/sentimental tales of Cold War 
childhood, thrillers about sleeping with the enemy (political informers), and psychological dramas centering 
on political trauma, resistance, and compromise. All films shown with English subtitles. No prerequisites. 
Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Literature 216S, Visual and Media Studies 284S, Slavic and Eurasian 
Studies 288S, International Comparative Studies 288S
298S. Revealing Histories: Polish Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Explores the films of four famous Polish 
directors—Andrzej Wajda, Andrzej Munk, Krzysztof Kieœlowski, and Agnieszka Holland—whose artistic 



Romanian (ROMANIAN) 761

approaches and ethical/political themes greatly influenced Polish and European cinema as well as Polish 
politics. Through viewing their movies and consulting biographical, historical, and critical materials, we’ll 
examine how these directors use film to reconstruct history, challenge politically or religiously orthodox myths, 
and suggest new ways of valuing the complexity and spiritual capacities of the individual. All texts in English 
translation. All films screened with subtitles. Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
297S, Literature 298S
301S. Contemporary Polish Composition and Readings. CCI, FL Advanced grammar and syntax 
with intense composition component. Analytical readings in the original. Prerequisite: Polish 203 and 204, or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302S. Contemporary Polish Composition and Readings. CCI, FL Continuation of Polish 301S. 
Prerequisite: Polish 301S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
308S. Fragmented Memories: Polish and Polish Jewish Culture Through Film. ALP, CCI, 
CZ, EI Analyzes, compares, and assesses representations of Polish Christians and Polish Jews—their life 
experiences, interactions, shared and separate fates—in documentaries and fiction films made in Poland from 
the 1930s to the present day. Includes films by Wajda, Polanski, Munk, Kieslowski; also a 2008 documentary 
about pre-World War II Christian-Jewish relations in Poland by Jolanta Dylewska. All films screened with 
English subtitles. Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Religion 269S, Jewish Studies 269S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 308S, Human Rights
390AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Polish. Topics differ by 
section. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Romanian

Courses in Romanian (ROMANIAN)
101. Introduction to Romanian Language. FL Introduction to Romanian comprehension, speaking, 
writing, reading and cultural acquisition. Instructor: Staff. One course.
102. Introduction to Romanian Language. FL Continuation of Romanian 101: introduction to Romanian 
comprehension, speaking, writing, reading and cultural acquisition. Prerequisite: Romanian 101 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
111. Intensive Romanian Language and Culture. FL Introduction to Romanian comprehension, 
speaking, writing, reading, and cultural acquisition. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.
203. Intermediate Romanian Language and Culture. FL Focus on the study of Romanian phonetics, 
grammar, discourse, textual analysis, and writing. Prerequisite: Romanian 111 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.

Russian

Courses in Russian (RUSSIAN)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered but are restricted to the study of literature, 
linguistics, and culture in the Slavic world. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Elementary Russian I. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, and writing. Study of 
contemporary Russian language and important elements of Russian culture. Instructor: Van Tuyl. One course.
101SA. Elementary Russian I. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, writing and grammar. 
Study of contemporary Russian language and important elements of Russian culture. Taught in St. Petersburg, 
Russia. Course taught in Russian and English. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Andrews, Guliakova, 
Koshkarova, Miroshnikova. One course.
102. Elementary Russian II. FL Continuation of Russian 101. Introduction to understanding, speaking, 
reading, and writing. Study of contemporary Russian language and important elements of Russian culture. 
Second half of Russian 101, 102. Prerequisite: Russian 101. One course.



 Russian (RUSSIAN)762

102SA. Elementary Russian II. FL Introduction to understanding, speaking, reading, writing and grammar. 
Study of contemporary Russian language and important elements of Russian culture. Taught in St. Petersburg, 
Russia. Course taught in Russian and English. Second half of Russian 101. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Andrews, Guliakova, Koshkarova, Miroshnikova. One course.
111. Intensive Russian. FL Intensive study of contemporary Russian language and important elements of 
Russian culture. Instructor: Andrews or Maksimova. Two courses.
112. Accelerated Russian Language and Culture I. FL Accelerated study of contemporary Russian 
language and important elements of Russian culture. Intended for students with no previous knowledge of 
Russian interested in achieving significant proficiency in speaking, reading, writing, and comprehension based 
on cultural constructs in one semester of study. Includes significant use of technology to enhance learning. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
112A. Accelerated Russian Language and Culture I. FL Accelerated study of contemporary Russian 
language and important elements of Russian culture. Intended for students with no previous knowledge of 
Russian interested in achieving significant proficiency in speaking, reading, writing, and comprehension based 
on cultural constructs in one semester of study. Includes significant use of technology to enhance learning. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
121FS. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see 
Education 112FS; also C-L: Public Policy 183FS, Science & Society 112FS, Human Rights Program-Franklin 
Humanities Institute 112FS, Human Rights
190S. Special Topics in Russian Culture. Special Topics in Russian Culture. Topics vary each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
203. Intermediate Russian I. FL Intensive classroom and laboratory practice in spoken and written 
patterns. Reading in contemporary literature. Prerequisite: Russian 101 and 102, or two years of high school 
Russian. Instructor: Apollonio. One course.
204. Intermediate Russian II. FL Intensive classroom and laboratory practice in spoken and written 
patterns. Reading in contemporary literature. Prerequisite: Russian 101, 102 and 203 or equivalent. Instructor: 
Apollonio. One course.
205. Intermediate Russian Conversation. Consolidation of oral skills. Intensive conversation on a broad 
range of topics. Prerequisite: Russian 101 and 102, or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
207AS. Intermediate Russian Language and Culture. CZ, FL Intensive classroom practice in phonetics, 
conversation, and grammar. Focus on literature and films, with museum and theater performance component. 
(Taught in St. Petersburg in Russian and English depending on placement.) Prerequisite: Russian 102 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
208AS. Intermediate Russian Language and Culture. CZ, FL Continuation of Russian 207AS. (Taught 
in St. Petersburg in Russian and English depending on placement.) Prerequisite: Russian 207AS or equivalent. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
216S. Neuroscience and Human Language. NS, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 216S; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 116S, Science & Society
221A. Russian Language Studies in St. Petersburg. CCI, FL Russian grammar, composition and textual 
analysis taught only in St. Petersburg for students participating in the semester program. Explicit analysis 
of historical and contemporary cultural representations and texts in language, literature and the verbal arts. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
222A. Language, Culture, and Myth: The Slavic Proverb. ALP, CCI The sources of the Slavic proverb, 
the proverb as microtext of national stereotypes, and its function in modern literature and culture. West, 
South and East Slavic proverbs contrasted with other Indo-European language families. Theoretical aspects 
include explications of the relationship of language and culture and problems of translation. Taught in English 
or Russian. Readings in Russian with excerpts from other Slavic languages. Taught in St. Petersburg, Russia. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
223A. Contemporary Russian Media. CCI, EI, FL, SS Same as Russian 135 but taught only in St. 



Russian (RUSSIAN) 763

Petersburg. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 320A, International Comparative Studies
267S. Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 267S; also C-L: Public Policy 267S, 
Sociology 267S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 267S, Study of Ethics 267S, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
277S. Medical Ethics, Aging, and End of Life Care in the US. ALP, CCI, EI, W One course. C-L: 
see Education 277S; also C-L: Global Health 277S, Public Policy 274S, Study of Ethics 277S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 277S, Human Rights
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Russian. Intensive in-country 
study of Russian language and culture. Analysis of literary and journalistic texts, film, television and popular 
culture. Specific body of texts differs by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Topics in Russian Studies. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
301S. Contemporary Russian Composition and Readings. CCI, FL Advanced grammar and syntax 
with intense composition component. Analytical readings in the original. Prerequisite: Russian 203 and 204, or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
302S. Contemporary Russian Composition and Readings. CCI, FL Continuation of Russian 301S. 
Prerequisite: Russian 301S. Instructor: Staff. One course.
307AS. Studies in the Russian Language and Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Analytical readings including 
grammatical and textual analysis. Additional work in phonetics and conversation. Literature, films, museums, 
and theater performances central for analysis and written assignments. (Taught in St. Petersburg in Russian.) 
Prerequisite: Russian 204 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
308AS. Studies in the Russian Language and Culture. CCI, CZ, FL Continuation of Russian 307AS. 
Prerequisite: Russian 307AS or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: International Comparative 
Studies
310. The Russian Fairy Tale and Its Cultural Legacy. ALP, CCI, CZ Introduction to Russia’s 
extraordinary fairy tales and their rich legacy in modern Russian literature, music, visual and performing arts, 
and handicrafts. Reflects on the genesis of the the Russian fairy tale; samples thematic groups of tales (e.g., 
the “foolish” third son, stepmother-stepdaughter tales); reads tales as expressions of folk belief, works of oral 
art, explorations of the human psyche and human relations, and stylized reflections of their sociopolitical 
context. Also traces how certain tales have been reworked into other art forms. All texts in English translation. 
Instructor: Holmgren. One course.
311. The Quest for Identity: Russian Literature and Culture, 1800-1855. ALP, CCI, W Examines 
how Russian writers and artists distinguished imperial Russia’s modern political, social, and cultural identity 
under “Western eyes.” Topics include search for “truly Russian” models, topics, and styles; domestic debate 
between “Westernizing” and “Slavophile” camps; emergence of women writers; relations between urban and 
provincial cultures; connections between national identity formation and empire building. Course texts may 
include fiction, memoirs, and drama by Pushkin, Durova, Gogol, Lermontov, and Pavlova; social commentary by 
Belinsky and Herzen; works of fine art and folk culture. Instructor: Staff. One course.
313. The Russian Novel. ALP, CCI, R Close reading of Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina, Dostoevsky’s Possessed, 
Andrey Bely’s Petersburg, Bulgakov’s Master and Margarita, Nabokov’s The Gift, and Makine’s Memoirs of 
my Russian Summers. Discussions will focus on these representative writers’ changing perceptions of, and 
responses to social and ethical issues and of creativity, itself, as the genre evolved in the modern times between 
the 1870s and now. Final research paper required and can include in-depth discussion of one of the works or the 
comparison of one or more aspects of several texts. Taught in English. Instructor: Apollonio and Gheith. One 
course.
317S. Expressing Immigrant Experience: The Russians. ALP, CCI, EI Some of the world’s greatest 
artistic works have emerged from the creator’s experience of crossing boundaries--linguistic, geographic, 
cultural, and social/psychological. This course examines the particular case of Russia’s emigre experience in the 
English-speaking world as recorded in literature and the other creative arts. Instructor: Apollonio. One course. 
C-L: English 318S, Literature 319S
318. Follow the Ruble: Money in Russian Literature and Culture. ALP, CZ, EI Reading Russian 



 Russian (RUSSIAN)764

literature through the lens of economics. Money as a driving plot principle in fiction from the 1600s to the 
present day. The profit motive underlying Russian artistic depictions of criminality. Gamblers, rogues, 
smugglers, thieves, tycoons, oligarchs, and “New Russian” entrepreneurs as protagonists. Swindling and black 
marketeering as the underside of an economic system that condemns capitalism and the “middleman.” Financial 
dealings as a battlefield between Russian and Western cutural values. Students are encouraged to do course 
projects applying economic analytical models to literary texts and films. Instructor: Apollonio. One course. C-L: 
Economics 213, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics, International Comparative Studies, Ethics Elective
321. The New Russia: Reflections of Post-Soviet Reality in Literature and Film. ALP, CCI, 
EI Examination of fiction and film in the post-Soviet period. Topics include: crime and social breakdown in the 
1990s and 2000s; transformations of classic character types (anti-hero, virgin-whore, swindler-rogue); religious 
and ethical quests; taboo-breaking themes. Works by authors Sorokin, Grishkovets, Pelevin, Petrushevskaya, 
Sadur, Shishkin, Minaev, Tolstaya, Akunin, Ulitskaya and filmmakers Bodrov, Rogozhkin, Bekmambetov, 
Khlebnikov/Popogrebsky, Balabanov, and Sokurov. Readings and class discussions in English. Instructor: 
Apollonio. One course.
323. Dostoevsky. ALP, CCI, W Introduction to life, works, and criticism. Readings include: Crime and 
Punishment, The Idiot, and The Brothers Karamazov. Taught in English. Instructor: Apollonio or Gheith. One 
course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
325. Tolstoy and the Russian Experience. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Historical approach to Tolstoy’s depictions 
of major societal and ethical issues (e.g., war, peace, marriage, death, religion, relationships). Culture of salons, 
print culture, censorship, and changing political climate. Central questions on the relationship of fiction and 
history: uses of fiction for understanding history and dangers of such an approach. Readings include selected 
fiction of Tolstoy, excerpts from journals and letters, and critical and historical accounts of nineteenth-century 
Russia. Instructor: Gheith. One course. C-L: History 277
327S. Chekhov. ALP, CCI, W Drama and prose works. Taught in English. Not open to students who have 
taken Theater Studies 157S/Russian 174S (Chekhov). Instructor: Apollonio. One course. C-L: Theater Studies 
322S, International Comparative Studies
328S. Bunin: Mystery of the Russian Soul and Metaphysical Memory. ALP, CCI, FL Prose works 
of Ivan Bunin; emphasis on elements of tragedy, metaphysical representations, phenomenological novel and 
modernism, synthesis of verbal and visual art forms. Works include The Life of Arsenyer, Village, Sun Stroke, 
Light Breathing, Grammar of Love, Transformations, Pure Monday, and autobiographical and critical writings. 
Taught in Russian. Primary readings in Russian; secondary readings in Russian and English. Instructor: 
Maksimova. One course.
330. Beat Generation/Russian New Wave: Cultural Dissent in the Cold War. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, 
W Exploration of identity formation and cultural dissent in US and Soviet Union during Cold War through 
lens of Beat Generation and New Wave literature and film; explores cultural dissent in relation to both a 
given culture context but also considers how such dissent is read and appropriated in comparative contexts; 
introduces students to key figures/features of respective movements, placing these in historical context; figures 
include: Kerouac, Burroughs, Ginsberg, Snyder, R. Frank, Aksyonov, Bitov, Akhmadulina, Voznesensky, 
Visotsky, Tarkovsky and Yevtushenko. Instructor: Gheith. One course. C-L: English 378, Literature 331
331. Demons, Rebels, Madmen, Fools: Non-Conformists in Russian Literature, Culture, and 
Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Examines the Russian anti-hero as literary figure, social critic, religious seeker, 
and revolutionary. The non-conformist hero performs an ethical role in culture, speaking truth to power and 
suffering the consequences. The tension between hero and society produces one of the world’s great literary 
traditions, and offers a framework for understanding Russia’s lurid history. Subjects include the scetic monk, 
holy fool, anarchist, political revolutionary, Gulag prisoner, drunkard, murderer, punk poet, vampire, and 
demon. The course will discuss folk tales, hagiographies, stories, poems, songs, films, and multimedia. Authors 
will include Avvakum, Pushkin, Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Leskov, Chekhov, Shukshin, Erofeev, Pelevin, Tolstaya, 
Pussy Riot, and Tarkovsky. Instructor: Apollonio. One course.
340S. Reading Chekhov in Russian. ALP, FL Close engagement with Chekhov’s stories, plays, and letters 
in the original. Work with Russian scholarship and scholarly format. Discussions and written assignments 
in Russian, including short essays and performances. Can be taken together with 327S (“Chekhov,” taught in 



Russian (RUSSIAN) 765

English), or independently. Open to students at the 300 level of language proficiency. Instructor: Apollonio. Half 
course.
350. Eastern Europe in Transition: Markets, Media, and the Mafia. CCI, CZ, SS The progress of 
political, economic, and social transformations in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Topics include: 
The Historical Context for Reform in Eastern Europe, Economic Reform and its Effects, Market Evolution, 
Eastern European Societies in Transition: Education and Culture, Eastern European Societies in Transition: 
Corruption and the Mafia in Everyday Life, Media and Democracy in Eastern Europe, Establishing Law-Based 
States in Eastern Europe. Instructor: Newcity. One course. C-L: Sociology 221, Visual and Media Studies 318, 
Policy Journalism and Media
351S. Directing Chekhov. ALP, CCI, EI One course. C-L: see Theater Studies 351S
352. End of Russian Socialism: History of Perestroika. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see History 
282
356. The Russian Empire. CCI, CZ, SS Russian imperial history from Peter the Great to Bolshevik 
Revolution: 1700-1917. Focus on formation and governance of multiethnic and multiconfessional Russian 
empire. Traces expansion of land-locked city state (Muscovy) into world power ruling from Eastern Europe to 
Alaska. Questions implications of Russia’s world-power status. Examines institutions of governance that created 
this empire and held its various ethnic, religious and ideological groups together for centuries. Readings of 
English translations of works of Russian literature and historiographic analyses aimed at developing a sound 
grounding in Russian imperial history and culture. Instructor: Tuna. One course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian 
Studies 356, History 275
362. Languages of the World. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 202; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 202, International Comparative Studies 210
363. Theory and Practice of Translation. CCI, FL Detailed study of the American, European and Slavic 
scholarly literature on translation combined with close analysis of existing literary and journalistic translations 
and a program of practical translation projects from English to Russian and Russian to English. Instructor: 
Apollonio. One course.
364. Gender and Language. CCI, R, SS Theoretical approaches to the question of the interrelationship 
of gender and language including neurobiology, psychology, semiotics, feminist critical theory, philosophy of 
language, discourse analysis, and linguistic theory. Taught in English. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 232, International Comparative Studies 207, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 
232, Linguistics 364
370S. Islam in Asia. CCI, CZ, SS Focus on the northern tier of Muslim-inhabited lands. The early spread of 
Islam among continental Asia’s non-Arab peoples. The evolution of Muslim religious and cultural institutions 
under Mongol, Central Asian, Russian and Chinese empires. Asian Muslim encounters with European 
modernity and experience of Muslims under and after Soviet/Chinese socialist regimes. Instructor: Tuna. One 
course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 370S, History 209S, Religion 378S, International Comparative Studies 
370S, Islamic Studies
371S. Russian Fiction and Film. ALP, CCI Russia’s turbulent history recounted through its literature and 
film. Short works by Russia’s most famous authors (Dostoevsky, Tolstoy, Chekhov) as well as the writings of 
lesser-known, but equally important writers (Teffi, Vladimov); comparison of these written works with films 
made of the stories. Exploration of the main trends of Russian culture through its literature and film; focus 
on the differences between film and written narratives. Instructor: Gheith. One course. C-L: Literature 370S, 
International Comparative Studies
373S. Russian Language and Culture through Film. CCI, FL, SS, STS Study of Russian cultural 
paradigms and constructs of self and other as demonstrated in Russia and Soviet films, primarily from 1960s to 
the present. Special attention given to the analysis of linguistic constructs and their cultural semantic content as 
well as comparative analyses of Soviet and Russian culture and Russian and European/American culture. Film 
and computer technology, as well as access to these technologies and their implementation, are a central part of 
the cultural context. Prerequisite: Russian 301S or equivalent or consent of instructor. Instructor: Maksimova. 
One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 317S



 Russian (RUSSIAN)766

374S. Russian Language and Culture through Film II. ALP, CCI, FL, SS, STS Continuation of 
Russian 373S. Analysis of Russian cultural paradigms and linguistic issues through contemporary Russian and 
Soviet film. Film and computer technology, as well as access to these technologies and their implementation, 
are a central part of the cultural context. Prerequisite: Russian 301S or equivalent, or consent of instructor. 
Instructors: Maksimova. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 319S
381. Russian Revolutionary Cinema. CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see History 281; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 253, Marxism and Society
383. The Actress: Celebrity and the Woman. ALP, CCI, CZ Explores through fiction, film, 
autobiographies, and biographies the significance and influence of the actress (on stage and screen) from 
eighteenth century to present day. Highlighted topics: actress’s self-image and perception of her art; relationship 
between her public profession and private life; how she reflects/sets contemporary standards for beauty and 
lifestyle; how she provokes public debate over women’s “appropriate” sexual, familial, professional, and public 
roles; her function as symbol/role model for her gender, race, nation. Includes Sarah Bernhardt’s memoirs, 
Chekhov’s The Seagull, Susan Sontag’s In America, films All About Eve and Mommie Dearest. Taught in 
English. Instructor: Holmgren. One course. C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 260, Theater Studies 
323, International Comparative Studies 383
386. The Power of Pushkin: Russia, USSR, and Beyond. ALP, CCI, CZ This course, taught in English 
and with readings in translation, explores the literary works of Alexander Pushkin as well as Pushkin’s elevated 
place in the culture(s) of pre-revolutionary Russia, the Soviet Union, and post-Soviet Russia. We will also study 
Pushkin’s connection to Africa and to African American writers of the early twentieth century. Instructor: Van 
Tuyl. One course.
390. Special Topics in Russian Culture. Special topics in Russian culture. Topics vary each semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
399. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS This course will examine the process of globalization of Russian culture 
and institutions as manifested in political, economic, and legal institutions; religion; education; popular and 
academic cultural forms, including media and artistic texts, film, theatre and television; diplomacy; reproductive 
rights; health care; the role of censorship; views of citizenship, patriotism, and sport. We will evaluate 
the ethical issues, potential shift of cultural values, and their impact on 21st century Russian institutions. 
Instructor: Andrews and Newcity. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 399, Public Policy 223, International 
Comparative Studies 399, Markets and Management Studies
399A. Global Russia. CCI, CZ, EI, SS Globalization of Russian culture as manifested in popular/academic 
cultural forms, including political ideologies, media/artistic texts, film, theater/television, markets, educational/
legal institutions, historical/ contemporary social movements. Examination of ethical issues in context of such 
topics as the relationship between church and state; evolution of a totalitarian government into a democratic 
state; reproductive rights; struggle against corruption in education, finance, police; role of censorship; views of 
citizenship, patriotism, valor, and treason; historical perspectives on prison camps, abuses of psychiatry. Offered 
in the Duke in Russia Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Public Policy 
399A, Cultural Anthropology 399A, International Comparative Studies 399A
401. Advanced Russian. CCI, FL Intensive exposure to Russian word formation with an emphasis on the 
students’ refinement of oral and written language skills. Development of discourse strategies and writing style 
through textual analysis, compositions and essays. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 302S or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Maksimova. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
401A. Advanced Russian. CCI, FL Intensive exposure to Russian word formation with an emphasis on the 
students’ refinement of oral and written language skills. Development of discourse strategies and writing style 
through textual analysis, compositions and essays. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 302S or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Maksimova. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
402. Advanced Russian: Readings, Translation, and Syntax. CCI, FL Intensive reading and 
conversation with emphasis on the analysis of twentieth century Russian literary and culture texts. Russian 
media, including television and films. Prerequisite: Russian 401 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Maksimova. 
One course.
402A. Advanced Russian: Readings, Translation, and Syntax. CCI, FL Intensive reading and 



Russian (RUSSIAN) 767

conversation with emphasis on the analysis of twentieth century Russian literary and culture texts. Russian 
media, including television and films. Prerequisite: Russian 401 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Maksimova. 
One course.
407. Soviet and Post-Soviet Economic History. CCI, CZ, W One course. C-L: see Economics 407; also 
C-L: History 407
410. Leadership in International Relations. CCI, SS Course analyzes the impact political leaders have 
on international relations by examining case studies of specific decisions dealing with events of international 
importance over the past 3 decades, including end of the Cold War; the Falklands War; the unification of 
Germany; the Gulf War; the Soviet Union collapse; restoring Russian power, the decision to invade Iraq. 
Considers styles of leadership by American and Russian presidents and provides a basis for comparing the 
styles of other leaders analyzed. Considers such questions as similarities/differences in qualities of leadership 
in different societies, extent to which leaders are victims of circumstance, and degree to which decisions can 
change things. Instructor: Matlock. One course. C-L: Public Policy 409
415. U.S-Russia Relations: 1991-2016. CCI, SS A survey of relations of United States with Russian 
Federation since break-up of the Soviet Union. Examines government policies, agreements and disagreements 
in foreign policy, internal political and economic developments in both countries, and also public opinion, 
cultural relations, and role of mass media. Lectures, readings (including source documents), and final research 
paper. Instructor: Matlock. One course. C-L: Public Policy 352, Political Science 415
433S. Soviet Life through the Camera’s Lens. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL An in-depth look at images and 
representations of Soviet life through Soviet and Russian film. Film texts include films shown in theatres, 
television films and forbidden films/films with a very limited distribution. Emphasis on the period from the mid-
1970s through 1991. Course taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 301S or equivalent or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Maksimova. One course. C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 433S, Visual and Media Studies 435S
438AS. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 473AS; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 438AS
439S. Neuroscience and Multilingualism. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 473S; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 439S, Science & Society 439S
481. Living, Dying, Healing in Russia. CCI, EI, SS Explores ways historical, cultural, political forces 
shape major moments of the life course and the stories told to make sense of them. Team taught by a professor 
of literature and a professor of anthropology, focus is on family life, sexuality, childbearing and its prevention; 
biomedical health care and alternative healing; survival in gulag (concentration camp) conditions; care for 
the dead and dying and their families. By examining compelling works from a range of genres—short story, 
ethnographic case study, memoir, and novel—students will learn analytical techniques from both fields, and 
hone interpretive and writing skills. Knowledge of Russian is not required. Instructor: Gheith. One course. C-L: 
Cultural Anthropology 481, Global Health 481
490. Special Topics in Russian and American Culture. Addresses the broad, interdisciplinary issue of 
identity and otherness while studying specifically what happens when the cultures of Russia and the United 
States come into contact. Taught in English. Instructor: Van Tuyl. One course.
490S. Special Topics in Russian and American Culture. Seminar version of Russian 490. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493A. Research Independent Study in Russia. FL, R Individual research in a field of special interest 
under the supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report 
containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Andrews, Guliakova, Koshkarova, Miroshnikova. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R See Russian 493. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Russian (RUSSIAN)768

494A. Research Independent Study in Russia. FL, R Individual research in a field of special interest 
under the supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report 
containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Andrews, Guliakova, Koshkarova, Miroshnikova. One course.
505. Semiotics of Culture. ALP, CCI, CZ, R The theory of literature, arts, ethnicity, modernity, and culture 
from a cross-cultural perspective. Texts includThe theory of literature, arts, ethnicity, modernity, and culture 
from a cross-cultural perspective. Texts include the critical works of Lotman and the Tartu School, Bakhtin, Eco, 
Kristeva, Voloshinov, Medvedev, Barthes, Todorov, Jakobson, Ivanov, and Sebeok, as well as authentic culture 
texts from Slavic and European traditions. Research project required. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: 
Linguistics 505
506S. Semiotics and Linguistics (DS4). ALP, CCI, R, SS A survey of modern semiotics, particularly the 
works of C. S. Peirce, Roman Jakobson, Yury Lotman, Roland Barthes and Umberto Eco. Analysis of semiotic 
works directly related to questions of the construction of cultural and linguistic meaning, and linguistic sign 
theory. Emphasis on semiotic theories from a multi-cultural perspective, especially the European, Tartu, Soviet, 
and American schools. Research project required. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Linguistics 506S
507. Stylistic and Compositional Elements of Scholarly Russian. CCI, FL Intensive study of Russian 
scholarly and scientific texts from a variety of disciplines, including biology, business, anthropology, economics, 
law, history, mathematics, physics, political sciences, sociology, psychology, linguistics, and literary criticism. 
Mastery of stylistic and discourse strategies. Analysis of cultural patterning in textual construction in the 
humanities, social and natural sciences. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 204 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Maksimova. One course.
508. Legal and Business Russian. CCI, CZ, EI, FL Analysis of Russian language and culture in the area 
of legal studies and conducting business in or with Russia and other Commonwealth of Independent States 
countries. Primary materials include legal codes, law journals, contracts, advertising, financial documents, 
redactions of the Soviet and Russian constitutions (1905-present). Specific attention given to the analysis of 
evolution of property and ownership legislation, the workings of the legislative, executive and judicial branches 
of the Russian Federation government and contrastive analysis of Soviet, Russian (and where relevant Western) 
systems of jurisprudence. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 302S or equivalent. Instructor: Andrews or 
Maksimova. One course.
509. Theory and Methods of Comparative Linguistics. CCI, R, SS Diachronic and synchronic 
approaches to the study of comparative linguistics in phonology, morphology, morphophonemics, syntax, 
and lexical categories in the context of the world’s languages. Both Indo-European and non-Indo-European 
languages. Topics include theories of reconstruction, languages in contact, abductive processes, questions of 
linguistic typology and cultural-based approaches to the analytical study of human languages. Research project 
required. Instructor: Andrews. One course.
510. Cognitive and Neurolinguistics. NS, R, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 501; also C-L: 
Neuroscience 501S
511. The Struggle for Justice and Faith: Russian Literature and Culture, 1855-1900. ALP, 
CCI Considers how Russian writers, artists, and activists addressed 19th-century Russia’s cursed questions of 
“who is to blame” and “what is to be done”: specifically, how to reform an increasingly reactionary autocracy; 
how to bear witness for an impoverished underclass; what roles women should play in culture and politics; how 
to resist or improve on a soulless West; how to justify the existence of God in an unjust world. Course texts may 
include fiction and memoirs by Turgenev, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, Kovalevskaia, Figner; works of fine art, drama, 
and opera. Instructor: Staff. One course.
512. Women and Russian Literature. ALP, CCI, FL Issues of gender and society in women’s writing 
in Russian from the eighteenth to the twentieth centuries. Both autobiographical writings and prose fiction. 
Discussions of whether Russian women’s writings constitute a tradition and what role these works have played 
in Russian literature and culture. Taught in English. Readings in Russian. Instructor: Gheith. One course. C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies, International Comparative Studies
513. The Russian Novel. ALP, CCI, R Close reading of Tolstoy’s Anna Karenina, Dostoevsky’s Possessed, 
Andrey Bely’s Petersburg, Bulgakov’s Master and Margarita, Nabokov’s The Gift, and Makine’s Memoirs of 



Russian (RUSSIAN) 769

My Russian Summers. Discussions will focus on these representative writers’ changing perceptions of, and 
responses to social and ethical issues and of creativity, itself, as the genre evolved in the modern times between 
the 1870s and now. Final research paper required and can include in-depth discussion of one of the works or 
the comparison of one or more aspects of several texts. Taught in English. Readings in Russian. Instructor: 
Apollonio and Gheith. One course.
514. Russian Modernism. ALP, CCI Russian culture between the 1890s and the 1920s, including visual, 
musical, literary arts, and developments ranging from Neo-Christian mysticism, cosmism, synthesis of the 
arts, and revolutionary activism. Focus on literary-philosophical thought of that period. Taught in English. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
515S. The Russian Intelligentsia and the Origins of the Revolution. CZ, R One course. C-L: see 
History 535S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies
516. Media and Social Change. CCI, R, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Policy Journalism and Media Studies 
676; also C-L: Political Science 619, Public Policy 676, International Comparative Studies, Information Science + 
Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
517. Russian Poetry. Focus on nineteenth and twentieth centuries, including the Golden Age and the Silver 
Age. Authors include Pushkin, Lermontov, Bely, Blok, Akhmatova, Tsvetaeva, Mandelshtam, Pasternak, and 
Mayakovsky. Taught in English or Russian, according to students’ Russian language proficiency. Russian texts. 
Instructor: Van Tuyl. One course.
523. Dostoevsky. ALP, CCI, W Introduction to life, works, and criticism. Readings include: Crime and 
Punishment, The Idiot, and The Brothers Karamazov. Taught in English. Readings in Russian. Instructor: 
Apollonio or Gheith. One course. C-L: International Comparative Studies
525. Tolstoy and the Russian Experience. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI Historical approach to Tolstoy’s depictions 
of major societal and ethical issues (e.g., war, peace, marriage, death, religion, relationships). Culture of salons, 
print culture, censorship, and changing political climate. Central questions on the relationship of fiction and 
history: uses of fiction for understanding history and dangers of such an approach. Readings include selected 
fiction of Tolstoy, excerpts from journals and letters, and critical and historical accounts of nineteenth-century 
Russia. Similar to Russian 325 but requires additional assignments. Instructor: Apollonio or Gheith. One course.
526. Tolstoy. ALP, EI Introduction to life, works, and criticism, including Tolstoy’s philosophical and ethical 
discourse. Readings include: War and Peace, Anna Karenina, the shorter fiction, dramatic works and essays. 
Taught in English. Readings in Russian. Instructor: Van Tuyl. One course.
527S. Chekhov. ALP, CCI Drama and prose works. Readings in Russian. Instructor: Apollonio. One course.
528S. Bunin: Mystery of the Russian Soul and Metaphysical Memory. ALP, CCI, FL, R Same as 
Russian 328S, but includes additional assignments. Taught in Russian. Readings in Russian. Intensive critical 
component. Instructor: Maksimova. One course.
529S. Zamyatin. ALP, CCI, FL, R The novel We, short fiction, plays, and critical essays. In-depth textual 
analysis and study of Russian, American, and European criticism on Zamyatin, including his role in science 
fiction and anti-utopian literature in Russia and the West. Readings in Russian and English. Final research 
project required. Instructor: Andrews or Maksimova. One course.
530. Apocalyptic Visions and Diabolic Drama: The Works of Mixail Bulgakov. ALP, CCI, R Critical 
analysis of Bulgakov’s short stories, novellas, plays and novels. In-depth exposure to major critical works on 
Bulgakov and influential figures. Taught in English. Readings in English and Russian. Instructor: Andrews. One 
course.
530S. Apocalyptic Visions and Diabolic Drama: The Works of Mixail Bulgakov. ALP, CCI, 
FL Critical analysis of Bulgakov’s short stories, novellas, plays and novels. In-depth exposure to major critical 
works on Bulgakov and influential figures. Taught in Russian. Readings in Russian. Instructor: Andrews. One 
course.
533. Culture and Explosion: How Russian Culture Changed the World. ALP, CCI, CZ, 
STS Examination of Russian contributions to advancements in the sciences, mathematics, and the arts (visual/
textual/musical). Special attention is paid to the contributions of Mendeleev (chemistry), Vygotsky and Luria 
(cognitive and developmental psychology/neuroscience), Lobachevsky (non-Euclidean geometry), Sakharov 



 Russian (RUSSIAN)770

(nuclear physics, dissident), Kandinsky and Filonov (visual arts), Rachmaninoff, Shostakovich, Stravinsky, 
Prokofiev (composers), Zamiatin, Jakobson, Lotman, Bakhtin, Voloshinov (semiotics, theories of artistic texts). 
Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 533, Public Policy 508
533S. Culture and Explosions: How Russian Culture Changed the World. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL, 
STS Examination of Russian contributions to advancements in the sciences, mathematics, and the arts (visual/
textual/musical). Special attention is paid to the contributions of Mendeleev (chemistry), Vygotsky and Luria 
(cognitive and developmental psychology/neuroscience), Lobachevsky (non-Euclidean geometry), Sakharov 
(nuclear physics, dissident), Kandinsky and Filonov (visual arts), Rachmaninoff, Shostakovich, Stravinsky, 
Prokofiev (composers), Zamiatin, Jakobson, Lotman, Bakhtin, Voloshinov (semiotics, theories of artistic texts). 
TAUGHT IN RUSSIAN. Students must be at CEFR B1 proficiency level. Instructor: Andrews. One course.
551. Classics of Russian Literature and Textual Culture. ALP, CCI, FL, W Reading and writing about 
the classical works of Russian literature with intensive textual analysis, including prose (short stories and 
povesti), poetry, essays, fiction and nonfiction of the 19th and 20th centuries. Authors include Pushkin, Gogol, 
Lermontov, Turgenev, L. Tolstoy, Chekhov, Bunin. Writing component will develop expository prose style and 
rhetorical strategies. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 401 and 402, or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Maksimova. One course.
552. Russian Culture through Literature. ALP, CCI, FL, W Reading and writing about the important 
works of 20th and 21st century Russian literature, with intensive textual analysis and discussion of cultural 
relevance of the discourse of totalitarian regimes, including prose (short stories, one novel), poetry, and essays. 
Authors include Kharms, Shalamov, Vodolaskin. Writing component will develop expository prose style and 
rhetorical strategies. Taught in Russian. Prerequisite: Russian 401 and 402, or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Maksimova. One course.
561S. Soviet Art after Stalin 1956-1991. ALP, CCI, CZ Dissident art, graphic design, fine arts and 
architecture in context of Cold War and decline of totalitarianism. Themes include Soviet artists and the west, 
and representation of women in times of flux. Open to juniors and seniors and graduate students who must 
follow a more comprehensive reading program and complete upper level assignments. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Art History 544S
563. Theory and Practice of Translation. CCI, FL Detailed study of the American, European, and Slavic 
scholarly literature on translation combined with close analysis of existing literary and journalistic translations 
and a program of practical translation exercises and projects from English to Russian and Russian to English. 
Prerequisite: three years of Russian language study or consent of instructor. Instructor: Apollonio. One course.
564. Russian and Slavic Linguistics. SS Emphasis on synchronic linguistic theory focusing on East Slavic 
and Russian, but including diachronic approaches, and West and South Slavic languages. Focus on phonological, 
morphological, semantic and syntactic structures of Contemporary Standard Russian and modern Slavic 
languages. Instructor: Andrews. One course. C-L: Linguistics 564, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 564
577. Contemporary Russian Culture: Detective Novels and Film. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL Popular 
novelists and film/television from 1900s-early twenty first century Russia. Theories of genre, anthropological 
approaches to defining cultural trends, mass cultural phenomena, and impact of globalization. Authors include 
Marinina, Dashkova, Dontsova, Kunin, Ustinova, and Serova. Readings and films in Russian. Research paper of 
publishable quality required. Instructor: Andrews.
619S. The Empire’s Western Front: Russian and Polish Cultures. ALP, CCI, CZ Exploration through 
literature and film of the relationship between Russian and Polish cultures in the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries when imperial Russia/Soviet Union figured as Poland’s problematic “east,” and subject state of Poland 
figured as Russia’s problematic “west.” Nineteenth century anti-tsarist uprisings, 1920 Soviet-Polish campaign, 
Poland’s postwar sovietization, rise of Solidarity, construction of their respective national identity vis-a-vis an 
other imagined as foe or friend in fiction, drama, film, memoirs. Includes works by Pushkin and Dostoevsky; 
films by Andrzej Wajda. One course.
627. Soviet and Post-Soviet Economic History. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see Economics 627; 
also C-L: History 627
690S. Special Topics. Seminars in advanced topics, designed for seniors and graduate students. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.



Serbian and Croatian (SERBCRO) 771

Serbian and Croatian 

Course in Serbian and Croatian (SERBCRO)
490AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Serbian and 
Croatian. Topics differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Ukrainian

Courses in Ukrainian (UKRAIN)
111. Intensive Elementary Ukrainian. Ukrainian 1 and 2 combined in one semester. Two meetings daily. 
Required recording-listening practice in the language laboratory. Work on understanding, speaking, reading, 
and writing. Survey of main elements of grammar. No preliminary knowledge of Ukrainian necessary. Director 
of Undergraduate Studies consent required. Instructor: Staff. Two courses.

Uzbek

Courses in Uzbek (UZBEK)
112. Accelerated Uzbek Language and Culture I. FL Accelerated study of contemporary Uzbek language 
and culture designed to get students to intermediate level in one semester. No previous knowledge of Uzbek 
required. Focus on speaking, reading, writing, grammar and listening comprehension, as well as appropriate use 
of cultural constructs. Instructor: Staff. One course.
213. Accelerated Uzbek Language and Culture II. CZ, FL Continuation of UZBEK 112. Accelerated 
intermediate level course designed to get students towards advanced level in one semester. Focus on speaking, 
reading, writing, grammar and listening comprehension. Language taught embedded in cultural contexts. 
Prerequisite: Uzbek 112 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Russian Major
Major Requirements. The Russian major requires a minimum of ten Russian courses in the department, 

eight of which must be at the 200 level or above. All majors must take the following courses: Russian 203, 204, 
301S, 302S, 401, 402 or equivalent. Each major is additionally required to take four courses, of which at least 
three primarily focus on works of Russian culture (oral and written poetry and prose, drama, music, film, visual 
arts). The department urges students to consider coursework that would include at least one 500-level course. 

The Slavic and Eurasian Studies Major
The Slavic and Eurasian studies major is designed to enable students to gain knowledge about Slavic and 

Eurasian languages and cultures as well as the interrelated histories and contemporary interactions between these 
cultures. 

Major Requirements. To earn a major in Slavic and Eurasian studies, students must complete ten courses, 
eight of which must be at the 200 level or above. Required courses are one approved introductory course to the 
major (including, but not restricted to, Russian 350, Russian 370, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 373S, Slavic and 
Eurasian Studies 386S); one capstone seminar (Slavic and Eurasian Studies 423S) in their junior or senior year, 
which includes a significant research component; four language courses above the 102 level for Polish or four 
language courses above the 203-204 level for Russian; and four content (elective) courses on Slavic and Eurasian 
studies with no more than two of these on an exclusively Slavic topic. All 300-level and above courses with the 
designators Polish and Turkish may count toward the major. The Department of Slavic and Eurasian Studies also 
offers Romanian on a regular basis. These languages can be counted as fulfilling the language requirement with 
prior approval from the director of undergraduate studies. To determine if specific courses meet requirements for 
the major, students should consult with the director of undergraduate studies in the Slavic and Eurasian studies 
department.

Students are encouraged to study abroad in a country that is related to the geographical area covered by 
the major.



 Education and Human Development (EHD)772

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers work leading to Graduation with Distinction. See the section on honors in this 

bulletin and the departmental director of undergraduate studies.

The Minor
Minors are offered in Russian culture and language, Russian literature in translation, and Polish culture 

and language.

Russian Culture and Language
Requirements. Five courses, three of which must be at the 200 level or above. At least two of these courses 

must be Russian language courses.

Russian and East European Literature in Translation
Requirements. Five courses, three of which must be at the 200 level or above. 

Polish Culture and Language
Requirements. Five courses, three of which must be at the 200 level or above. At least two of these courses 

must be Polish language courses.

Social Science Research Institute
Courses in Education and Human Development (EHD)
190. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check individual 
semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check 
individual semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check individual 
semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check 
individual semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor permission may be required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
390. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check individual 
semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check 
individual semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal could include a substantive paper, written report or final project containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
395. Bass Connections: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and graduate 
students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore, and develop solutions to pressing social 
issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting fellows, and other experts from businesses, 
government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with, or contribute to, an ongoing 
research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work, and other learning experiences relevant 
to the project. Requires final paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
395-1. Bass Connections: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Half-credit version of EHD 395. Teams 
of undergraduate and graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore, and develop 



Education and Human Development (EHD) 773

solutions to pressing social issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting fellows, and other 
experts from businesses, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with, or 
contribute to, an ongoing research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work, and other 
learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires final paper or product containing significant analysis and 
interpretation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
396. Bass Connections: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Teams of undergraduate and graduate 
students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop solutions to pressing social issues. 
Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting fellows, and other experts from businesses, government, 
and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with, or contribute to, an ongoing research project. 
Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other learning experiences relevant to the project. 
Requires final paper or product containing significant analysis and interpretation. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
396-1. Bass Connections: Interdisciplinary Team Projects. R Half-credit version of EHD 396.Teams 
of undergraduate and graduate students work with faculty supervisors to identify, refine, explore and develop 
solutions to pressing social issues. Teams may also include postdoctoral fellows, visiting fellows, and other 
experts from business, government, and the non-profit sector. A team’s work may run in parallel with or 
contribute to an ongoing research project. Teams will participate in seminars, lectures, field work and other 
learning experiences relevant to the project. Requires final paper or product containing significant analysis and 
interpretation. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
490. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check individual 
semester offerings for additional prerequisites. Instructor permission may be required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
490S. Special Topics in Education and Human Development. Topics vary by semester. Check 
individual semester offerings for prerequisites. Instructor consent may be required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.

Courses in Interdisciplinary Data Science (IDS)
190S. Special Topics: Discovering the Social Sciences. Introduction to research methods in the social 
sciences with the chance to learn about the range of research questions, methods used across various fields that 
study how people think, act, and impact the world. Duke faculty from a wide range of departments will discuss 
their own research to showcase the range of quantitative and qualitative methods. By the end of the course, 
students should be able to: describe a good research question and how it affects choices in analytical methods, 
critically evaluate examples of social science research that use the tools explored in the class, and understand 
where at Duke they can learn and use the different methodologies covered in the class. Instructor: Cooper. Half 
course.
590. Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Data Science. Topics vary by semester. Individual semester 
offerings may require prerequisites or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S. Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Data Science. Topics vary by semester. Individual semester 
offerings may require prerequisites or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690. Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Data Science. Topics vary by semester. Individual semester 
offerings may require prerequisites or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S. Special Topics in Interdisciplinary Data Science. Topics vary by semester. Individual semester 
offerings may require prerequisites or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Sociology
Professor Read, Chair; Assistant Professor of the Practice Hamil-Luker, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Pro-
fessors Bail, Bonilla-Silva, Chaves, Gao, Harris, Healy, Keister, Lynch, Moody, Read, Ruef, Smith-Lovin, Vaisey, 
and Wildeman; Associate Professor Brown; Assistant Professors Harrell, Rawlings, Streib, and Yang; Professors 
Emeriti Cook, George, Land, Lin, McPherson, Morgan, O’Barr, O’Rand, Preiss, Simpson, Smith, Tiryakian, and 
Wilson; Professors of the Practice Reeves; Assistant Professor of the Practice Hamil-Luker; Secondary Appoint-



 Sociology (SOCIOL)774

ments and Affiliated Faculty: Professors Duke (Pediatrics), Dupre (Population Health Sciences), Gibson-Davis 
(Public Policy),  Gold (Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences), Hasan (Business Administration), Lewin (Business 
Administration), Merli (Public Policy), Rosette (Business Administration), and Wilder (Gastroenterology); As-
sociate Professors Baker (Cultural Anthropology), Crichlow (African & African American Studies), Cummings 
(Business Administration), and Hasso (Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies); Research Professors Stallard 
and Yashin; Associate Research Professor Shanahan (Ethics); Visiting Professor Jones; Visiting Associate Profes-
sors Hovsepian, Shamblin, and Tobin

A major and a minor are available in this department. The department also offers a minor in medical 
sociology.

Sociology is a field that uses scientific methodology to provide answers to questions about human behavior 
and society, such as: Who gets sick and why? What are the social causes of criminal behavior in America? How do 
social networks affect business profits? How can big data be used to understand political divides? The department 
prides itself on creating an engaging curriculum that develops students’ analytical and communication skills, 
provides in-depth knowledge in a variety of research methods and substantive areas, honing the tools needed for a 
wide variety of professions both in and out of academia. The department fosters active involvement in the learning 
process through seminars, fieldwork, independent study, and honors classes. 

Courses in Sociology (SOCIOL)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
90A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Sociology. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
110. Sociological Inquiry. CCI, EI, SS Introduction to social networks, groups, organizations and 
institutions with a focus on the contemporary US. The impact of technology on social interaction and cultural 
change. Investigation of cultural and social construction of individual characteristics (e.g., race, gender) as well 
as of scientific and professional standards. Ethical controversies surrounding health care, education, income 
inequality, and related topics. Course will help prepare students for the social and behavioral science portion of 
the MCAT exam. Instructor: Bail, Febbo, Healy, Harrell, Rawlings. One course.
140FS. On Suffering: How Science and Stories Shape Us. ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
140FS; also C-L: Global Health 140FS, Science & Society 140FS
148S. Empires in Modern European History. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see History 140S; also C-L: 
Political Science 140S, Cultural Anthropology 140S
160. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170; also C-L: Linguistics 170, Visual and Media Studies 170, International Comparative Studies 
169, Markets and Management Studies, Policy Journalism and Media Studies, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist 
Studies
160D. Advertising and Society: Global Perspective (DS4). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 170D; also C-L: Linguistics 170D, Visual and Media Studies 170D, Markets and Management 
Studies, International Comparative Studies 
167S. Gateway Seminar: Nationalism: Ideology, Technology, Globalization. CCI, CZ, SS One 
course. C-L: see History 167S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 167S
171. Business Anthropology: Anthropologists in the Workplace. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 171; also C-L: African & African American Studies 171, International Comparative Studies 171, 
Innovation and Entrepreneurship 171
176FS. Identity, Action, and Emotion. CCI, R, SS Uses mathematical models to describe how people 
import cultural meanings into social interactions. Explains how people maintain identities in role relationships 
and group interactions. Explores a theory of how people perform normal institutional roles, respond to odd 
situations, and try to feel good about themselves. Uses computer simulations to model self, identity and 
emotional processes. Involves reading academic literature, collecting evidence, giving research presentations, 
and writing a research proposal. Teaches how to think scientifically about routine and unexpected parts of 
everyday life. Instructor: Smith-Lovin. One course.
178FS. Refugees, Rights, and Resettlement. CCI, EI, SS 35 million refugees and internally displaced 



Sociology (SOCIOL) 775

persons in the world. A comparative historical overview of international refugee policy and law dealing with 
this growing population. Students will grapple with the ethical challenges posed by humanitarian intervention 
on behalf of refugees and the often unintended consequences of such policies. Students examine case studies to 
determine how different models for dealing with refugee resettlement affect the life chances of refugees. Service-
learning course. Students will work with refugees from Bhutan, Burma and Iraq recently resettled in Durham. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Shanahan. One course. C-L: Study of Ethics 199FS, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 178FS, Human Rights
179FS. Visualizing Society. QS, SS This class will teach you how to use modern, widely-used tools to create 
insightful, beautiful, reproducible visualizations of social science data. We will also put the theory and practice 
of visualization into context throughout the semester. By that I mean that we will think about different ways of 
looking at social science data, about where data comes from in the first place, and the implications of choosing 
to represent it in different ways. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Department consent required. 
Instructor: Healy. One course.
180S. Society, the Self, and the Natural World. CCI, EI, SS Exploration of changing and/or contrasting 
perceptions, studying how our perceptions are conditioned by the times we live in and reigning assumptions of 
our societies. Three course components taught by faculty in each discipline including: exploration of perceptions 
of the self through the arts, the changing role of women in society; and examination of science and society 
conflicts. Open only to Baldwin Scholars. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S. Seminar in Special Topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S-1. Seminar in Special Topics. Half-credit version of Sociology 190S. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
195. Comparative Approaches to Global Issues. CCI, CZ, SS, W One course. C-L: see International 
Comparative Studies 195; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 195, History 103, Political Science 110, Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 195, Marxism and Society
196FS. Patient and Research Participant Activism and Advocacy. SS, STS, W One course. C-L: see 
Science & Society 196FS; also C-L: African & African American Studies 196FS, Global Health 196FS, Psychology 
196FS, Public Policy 196FS, Cultural Anthropology 196FS, Science & Society
197FS. Freedom and the Market. EI, SS, W Introduces students to three ethically distinct perspectives 
on the market using approaches in political philosophy from the right, left and center; explores the works of 
political theorists and economists such as Robert Nozick, Milton Friedman, John Maynard Keynes, Frederick 
Hayes and Amartya Sen; examines the ethical stances that these authors take; explores contemporary media to 
see how the former thinkers have influenced current debate; examines examples of when the free market fails 
and discuss if, when and how government should respond; investigates how culture influences the market and 
how globalization has either enhanced or reduced individual freedom. Open only to Focus Program students. 
Instructor: Reeves. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies 195FS, Markets and Management 
Studies
202. Race, Power, and Identity: From Ali to Kaepernick. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Education 220; also C-L: African & African American Studies 232, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities 
Institute 221, Human Rights
210. Contemporary Social Problems. CCI, SS Comparative analysis of social problems across historical 
periods, nations, and social groups by gender, race/ethnicity, social class, and culture. Major topics: deviant 
behavior, social conflict and inequality, human progress and social change. Emphasis on research issues, 
especially how and to what degree the understanding of social problems is a direct result of the inductive 
processes used to define social problems and the research methods and procedures used to investigate them. 
Instructor: Febbo. One course. C-L: Child Policy Research
211. Social Inequality. CCI, SS The nature, forms, and socioeconomic bases of inequality. Age, gender, race, 
ethnicity, class, region, and family as dimensions of inequality. Variations in the structure of inequality over 
time and across nations. How educational institutions, economic development, work institutions, and state 
welfare programs affect the shape of inequality. Social inequality and social mobility. Instructor: Keister or staff. 
One course. C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 211, Human Rights, Gender, Sexuality, 
& Feminist Studies



 Sociology (SOCIOL)776

212. Gender and Global Health. SS One course. C-L: see Global Health 212; also C-L: Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 212, Human Rights
215. Sociology of Racism in America. CCI, EI, R, SS Examines social history of major racial groups in 
the US and relationships to contemporary standing. Discusses central concepts sociologists use to analyze racial 
matters. Central theme: “racism” is not mere “prejudice,” “ignorance,” or “intolerance,” but a comprehensive 
historical system of racial domination organized around the logic of white supremacy. Discussion of “whiteness” 
in the USA—how whiteness emerged as a social category, an identity based on experiences of variety of 
European “peoples;” how it dominated the racial structure of the US since the 17th century, how wealth has been 
distributed along racial lines, racialization of Asians and Latinos, and color blind racism. Instructor: Bonilla-
Silva. One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 246, Latino/a Studies in the Global South 316, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 215, Marxism and Society, Human Rights
218. Sex, Gender, and Society. CCI, SS Nature and acquisition of sex roles. Cross-cultural variations. 
Developing nature of sex roles in American society. Instructor: Hovsepian or Smith-Lovin. One course. C-L: 
Study of Sexualities, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies, International Comparative Studies
219. Juvenile Delinquency. CCI, EI, SS The concept and measurement of delinquency and status 
offending; trends and patterns in the delinquency rate. Theoretical models used to explain the onset of 
delinquent behavior; environmental and individual correlates of delinquency such as gender, race, and social 
class; influence of families, delinquent subcultures, gangs, schools, and drugs; history of juvenile justice and 
the philosophy and practice of today’s juvenile justice system; legal and ethical issues such as major court 
decisions on juveniles’ rights, the use of detention, and transfer to adult court; models of sentencing, juvenile 
incarceration, and community treatment programs and their efficacy. Instructor: Febbo or staff. One course. 
C-L: Child Policy Research
220. Causes of Crime. EI, SS The field of criminology and its most basic concepts: the definition of crime, 
the component areas of criminology, the history of criminology, criminological research methods, and the 
ethical issues that confront the field. The nature, extent, and patterns of crime, including victimization. 
Evaluation of criminological theories, including: biological, psychological, sociological, and cultural deviance 
theories; criminal behavior including violent crime, property crime, white-collar and organized crime, public 
order crimes, sex offenses, and substance abuse; the justice process, including police, courts, and corrections; 
the policy implications of criminological research. Instructor: Hamil-Luker. One course.
221. Eastern Europe in Transition: Markets, Media, and the Mafia. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see 
Russian 350; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 318, Policy Journalism and Media Studies
222. Inequalities in the US Criminal Justice System. CCI, EI, SS Overview of the inner workings 
and ethics of the US criminal justice process, including criminal legislation, police procedures, courts, and 
corrections. Explores case studies, empirical research, film, theories, and policies to understand and evaluate 
how values, culture, and the distribution of power and resources in the United States shape its punishment 
regime. Focuses on class, gender, ethnic, racial, nationality, and age inequalities in the justice system. 
Instructor: Hamil-Luker. One course.
223. Data Analytics and Visualization for Business. SS This course gives students hands-on experience 
working with and analyzing data. The overarching objective is to learn to use basic statistics and quantitative 
modeling to understand the large amount of data that are available today. Instructor: Keister. One course. C-L: 
Markets and Management Studies
224. Human Development (D). CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Human Development 224
225. Intimate Inequalities: The State of American Families. CCI, R, SS Most people grow up in 
families, but few know much about them. Taken for granted beliefs that marriages should be based on love, that 
heterosexuality is an obvious identity, and that mothers want to care for their children, are recent inventions. 
Gender, social class, and racial inequalities within and across families. Course focuses on changes over time in 
family structures and roles. How families experience and generate inequality. Instructor: Streib. One course. 
C-L: Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies, Child Policy Research
226. The Challenges of Development. CCI, EI, SS Diverse perspectives on economic development and 
theories concerning the role of transnational corporations and international financial institutions (for example, 
World Bank) in developing nations, assessed with the aid of sociological and economic data. Comparison 



Sociology (SOCIOL) 777

of different countries and world regions in terms of their historical trajectories, development strategies and 
current challenges in economic and social development, broadly conceived in terms of material circumstances, 
political economies, and quality of life. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Latin American Studies, Markets and 
Management Studies, Marxism and Society, International Comparative Studies
227. Leadership and Collaboration. CCI, EI, SS Leadership is essential to the success of groups, 
organizations, and societies. To be effective, leaders must possess a clear understanding of human behavior 
and social processes. This course is an introduction to the study of leadership from the perspective of the social 
sciences. We will draw on a range of social science research to address key questions about the process and 
practice of collaborative leadership and followership. The goal of the course is to not only expose students to the 
empirical study of leadership and followership but also stimulate them to think critically about human behavior. 
Instructor: Harrell. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
228. Incarceration and Inequality in the United States. CCI, EI, SS Investigates the causes, 
consequences, experience and potential transformation of US prisons, jails, and detention centers. Stimulates 
critical thought, discussion, and research on alternative ethical positions on criminal justice policies, such as 
immigration detention, the war on drugs, prison privatization and mandatory sentencing, which have created 
and maintain the unequal distribution of mass incarceration. Examines the US carceral state as an institution of 
stratification that exacerbates social problems it is charged with tackling, prevents social mobility for the most 
marginalized, and solidifies disadvantages based on age, class, gender, race, ethnicity, sexuality, and citizenship. 
Instructor: Hamil-Luker. One course.
229. Gender, Work, and Organizations. CCI, SS Research and theories on gender issues in the work 
organization. The socio-historical causes of gender segregation in the workplace and the contemporary 
consequences for wages and occupational status. Organizational and governmental work and family policies. 
Case studies of specific work organizations with gender-related problems are utilized in group projects and 
presentations. C-L: Markets and Management Studies. Instructor: Yang or staff. One course. C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 241, Markets and Management Studies
232. Data Visualization for Social Science. QS, SS, STS This course introduces modern methods and 
tools for the visualization of social-scientific data. The course has a theoretical and practical element. We will 
explore the theory and history of efforts to visualize social data, and society more generally, examining the 
nature and politics of data generation and consumption, and about the implications of choosing to represent 
it in different ways. Practically, we will learn how to use R and related tools to produce insightful, beautiful, 
reproducible data visualizations. Instructor: Healy. One course.
240. Love and Loneliness: What’s Happening to Relationships in the Twenty-First Century?. 
CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 240; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 
250, Study of Ethics 240
250. Medical Sociology. EI, SS Interface between sociology and health-related issues. Analysis of macro, 
mezzo, and micro perspectives as they apply to health and illness. Examination of the social and cultural 
context in which health care in the United States is delivered, particularly in terms of racial and age disparities, 
as well as disparities in rural and urban healthcare settings. Objective and subjective experience of health and 
illness, political, economic and environmental issues, including engagement with ethical issues around end of 
life care, physician assisted suicide, health rights versus health privileges. Exposure to these areas takes place 
theoretically in class, as well as in real-world settings. Instructor: Brown. One course.
250-1. Medical Sociology. EI, SS Examination of the social and cultural context in which health care in 
the United States is delivered, particularly in terms of racial and age disparities, as well as disparities in rural 
and urban healthcare settings. Objective and subjective experience of health and illness, political, economic 
and environmental issues, including engagement with ethical issues around end of life care, physician assisted 
suicide, health rights versus health privileges. Exposure to these areas takes place theoretically in class, as well 
as in real-world settings: course includes service-learning component, in which students spend 20 hours during 
the semester volunteering in a health-based care facility. Instructor: Gold. One course.
252A. From Enlightenment Culture to Popular Culture. CCI, FL, SS One course. C-L: see French 
352A; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 352A
255. Sociology of Immigration and Health. CCI, SS An in-depth exploration of how global migration 
processes impact population health with particular attention to the social determinants of health. Course focuses 



 Sociology (SOCIOL)778

on different immigrant groups in U.S. as well as refugee and migrant labor populations in other parts of the 
world, namely Middle East. Descriptive assessments of immigrant health inequalities and analytic examinations 
of mechanisms that contribute to disparities will be covered. Readings selected from sociological and medical 
writings. Not open to students who have taken Sociology 361/Global Health 340/Human Rights 362. Instructor: 
Read. One course.
257. From Madness to Mental Disorders: Sociology of Mental Health. CCI, EI, SS Investigates 
mental health processes and policies in historic, cultural, and socioeconomic context. Explains why definitions 
of and responses to mental illness have changed across time and place. Probes ethical dilemmas created by the 
medicalization of deviance. Examines how social conditions shape the development and consequences of mental 
disorders, treatments, and policies. Evaluates alternative theoretical explanations for how mental well-being and 
mental health services are linked to socioeconomic status, gender, race, ethnicity, citizenship, age, and sexuality. 
Assesses ability of alternative policies to improve public mental health. Instructor: Hamil-Luker. One course. 
C-L: Global Health 257
258. Markets and Marketing. CCI, R, SS, STS Markets as systems of social exchange: their organization 
and development with special reference to the role of technological change in market evolution in various 
parts of the industrialized world. Sociological analysis of contemporary marketing including cross-national 
comparisons and the role of internet technologies; researching and preparing a marketing plan. Coverage of 
marketing includes attention to issues of values and ethics. Instructor: Reeves, Shamblin, or staff. One course. 
C-L: Markets and Management Studies
260. Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Human 
Development 260; also C-L: Psychology 236, Ethics Elective
263. Aging and Health. EI, SS, W Illness and health care utilization among the elderly, comparison to 
other populations, gender and race differences, medicare and medicaid, individual adjustment to aging and 
illness, social support for sick elderly, the decision to institutionalize, policy debate over euthanasia. Required 
participation in service-learning. Instructor: Gold. One course.
264. Death and Dying. EI, SS The biomedical, economic, social, and psychological issues surrounding 
death and dying in the twenty-first century in America. Religious and cultural perspectives both in the Judeo-
Christian ethic and in other religious frameworks. Theories of dying from sociological and social psychological 
perspectives. Required participation in service-learning. Instructor: Gold. One course. C-L: Global Health
265. Drug Use and Abuse: Getting High in the United States. EI, SS Explores trends in the use, abuse, 
and regulation of mind-altering substances in the United States. Topics include: patterns of drug use over time 
and across social groups; drug market creation and regulation; media promotion and condemnation of drug 
activities; drug policy legislation and enforcement; medicalization of deviance; rise and fall of drug panics; and 
critical analysis of the casualties of the current war on drugs. No prerequisites. Instructor: Hamil-Luker. One 
course.
267S. Global Cold War. CCI, CZ, EI, W One course. C-L: see History 267S; also C-L: Russian 267S, Public 
Policy 267S, Slavic and Eurasian Studies 267S, Study of Ethics 267S, Philosophy, Politics, and Economics
271. Comparative Health Care Systems. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 335; also C-L: 
Political Science 355
288S. Writing in Sociology. SS, W Introduction to writing in sociology. Topics include scenes and genres 
of sociological writing, reading sociology research, working with sources, making sociological claims, designing 
figures and tables, counterarguments and concessions, citations, style. Instructor: Moskovitz. One course.
290A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Sociology. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
290S. Seminar in Special Topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study for Nonmajors. Individual research and reading in a field of special interest, 
under the supervision of faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified juniors and seniors. 
Consent of instructor and Director of Markets and Management Studies. Does not count toward the Sociology 
major. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Sociology (SOCIOL) 779

293. Research Independent Study for Non-Majors. R Individual research in a field of special interest 
under the supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to qualified juniors and seniors. Consent of 
instructor and Director of Markets and Management Studies. Does not count toward the Sociology major. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. One course.
294A. Political Economy of Immigration. CCI, SS Two courses. C-L: see Political Science 294A; also C-L: 
Economics 434A, Public Policy 355A
295S. Sex Work: The Politics of Sexual Labor. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 352S; also C-L: Study of Sexualities 295S, Literature 295S
298D. Discovering Education and Human Development I: How Social Scientists Learn from 
Data. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Economics 298D; also C-L: Education 298D, Psychology 242D
323S. Social Movements in Age of Globalization. CCI, CZ, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 
332S; also C-L: Political Science 313S, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 313S, Human 
Rights
324S. The University as a Culture: A Survivor’s Guide. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 347S; also C-L: Education 347S, History 334S, Public Policy 350S, Human Rights Program-
Franklin Humanities Institute 347S, Human Rights
330S. Bad Behavior. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 333S; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 333S
331. Women at Work: Gendered Experience of Corporate Life. CCI, SS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 221
332. Methods of Social Research. R, SS, W Principles of social research, design of sociological studies, 
sampling, and data collection with special attention to survey techniques. Open only to Sociology majors. 
Sociology minors must contact the professor for approval. Instructor: Hamil-Luker. One course.
333. Quantitative Analysis of Sociological Data. QS, SS Introduction to quantitative analysis in 
sociological research, including principles of research design and the use of empirical evidence, particularly 
from social surveys. Descriptive and inferential statistics, contingency table analysis, and regression analysis. 
Emphasis on analysis of data, interpretation and presentation of results. Not open to students who have taken 
another 100-level (or above) statistics course. Course restricted to first and second Sociology majors. Instructor: 
Lynch. One course.
338. Theory and Society. CCI, SS, W Selective survey of major classical and modern social theorists from 
the Enlightenment to the present. Attention to theories seeking to follow models of the natural sciences and 
those seeking a more critical and interpretive understanding of modern society. Sociological theory in relation 
to other modern currents, such as conservatism, socialism, existentialism, anti-colonialism, feminism, post-
modernism. Instructor: Strieb or Moody. One course.
339. Marxism and Society. CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Literature 380; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 
203, Education 239, Political Science 371, International Comparative Studies, Marxism and Society
340. Taboo Markets. EI, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 280; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies 280
341. The United States and the Asian Pacific Region. CCI, CZ, R, SS Asian Pacific region is major 
engine of economic growth in the 21st century likely causing major shift of power and wealth in the world. Study 
relationships between US and various Asian Pacific nations from the end of World War II to present. Focus on 
impact of wars, technological development and economic development. Examine differences in various issues 
such as trade, human rights, environment, territory disputes between US and a variety of Asian Pacific nations. 
Instructor: Gao, Healy. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
342D. Organizations and Global Competitiveness. CCI, R, SS, STS Competition among national 
economies as understood in the context of social factors such as ethnicity, kinship, gender, and education, 
with a special emphasis on how technological change is reshaping the social, political, and economic bases of 
international competitiveness. Global industries in various regions of the world. Two research papers required, 



 Sociology (SOCIOL)780

at least one of which involves the analysis of international trade data. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Markets 
and Management Studies, International Comparative Studies
343. Displacements: Migration and Human Trafficking. ALP, CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
African & African American Studies 343; also C-L: Latin American Studies 343, Cultural Anthropology 342, 
Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 339, Human Rights
344. Technology and Organizational Environments. CCI, R, SS, STS How organizations 
(governments, private corporations, and non-profit organizations) are affected by the social, technological, and 
cultural environments in which they operate. Emphasis on how United States and Japanese cultures generate 
different modes of organization and differing environmental facilitators and obstacles. Competitive strategies 
(for example, mergers and takeovers) and the impact of technology on organizational structures (for example, 
the rapid diffusion of information technology). Research paper required, using either quantitative evidence or a 
case study approach. Instructor: Gao or staff. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
345. Nations, Regions, and the Global Economy. CCI, R, SS The changing configuration of global 
capitalism, with emphasis on comparing global regions of North America, Latin America, Europe, Africa, 
and Asia. The internal dynamics of these regions, including the development strategies of selected nations, 
interregional comparisons (for example, regional divisions of labor, state-society relationships, the nature of 
their business systems, quality of life issues). Research paper required. Instructor: Hovsepian. One course. C-L: 
Islamic Studies, Markets and Management Studies, International Comparative Studies
346A. From Transition to Indignation: Social Movements in Spain 1977-2013. CCI, EI, FL, SS One 
course. C-L: see Spanish 342A; also C-L: History 353A
346S. Asians in American Higher Education: Trends and Issues. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see 
Education 345S
347. Managing Networks: Research and Applications of Network Analysis to Business 
Organizations. R, SS The role that networks play in organizations. How networks affect a large number of 
significant behaviors and processes. Learn to harness the incredible power of social, economic, and political 
networks. Develop research, writing, and quantitative analysis skills with focus on business organizations. 
Relevant for students interested in Markets and Management and leadership positions. Instructor: Keister, 
Moody. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
349. Sexuality and Society. CCI, EI, R, SS Sociocultural factors affecting sexual behavior. Changing beliefs 
about sex; how sexual knowledge is socially learned and sexual identities formed; the relation between power 
and sex; control over sexual expression. Required participation in service-learning. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Study of Sexualities 229, Gender, Sexuality, & Feminist Studies
351. Life and Death: Global Perspectives. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural Anthropology 
341; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 353, Global Health 353
352S. Sociology through Photography. ALP, SS One course. C-L: see Documentary Studies 227S; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 218S
353. Sport and Society. EI, R, SS Sport roles and sport institutions examined using the sociological 
perspective to help explain different patterns of involvement in sport, the social forces that have created sports 
organizations, and the consequences of sports participation. The ethical consequences of the modern pressures 
on athletes in schools and colleges and the commercialism of professional sport. Research paper required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
354. Getting Rich: Financial Markets, Household Finance, and Wealth. R, SS, STS The functioning 
of financial markets and their effect on personal wealth and well-being. Comparison of sociological and 
economic approaches to markets for housing, stocks and bonds, credit, and related instruments. Major topics: 
market performance, wealth accumulation, social and economic stratification, personal finance, consumption 
and luxury fever, business cycles, economic booms and crises, and public policy related to financial markets. 
Instructor: Keister. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
355. Organizations and Management. SS, STS Dimensions and aspects of modern organizations and 
concepts and tools for analyzing them. Special attention to the impact of changing social and technological 
environments on the evolution of organizational structures and strategies and on issues related to business 



Sociology (SOCIOL) 781

ethics. The structure and operation of organizations; how organizations are managed by analyzing processes 
of organizational decision making; business case studies as illustrative of the concepts and the analytical tools. 
Instructor: Harrell, Rawlings, or Yang. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies, Gender, Sexuality, & 
Feminist Studies
357. Organizations and Management in Global Capital Markets: an Ethical Perspective. EI, 
R, SS, STS Analysis of financial, political and social consequences of business decisions made by financial 
institutions. How managers and corporations assess, envision and manage interactions with general, local, 
internal and natural environments within the current organizational structures of business, with focus on ethical 
perspectives. Examples and case studies of current decisions made by financial institutions will enhance critical 
thinking and reasoning to evaluate the process and consequences of these decisions. Offered only in the Duke in 
New York spring semester program. Instructor: Veraldi. One course. C-L: Markets and Management Studies
359. The Sociology of Entrepreneurship. CCI, SS Analysis of the psychological, religious, cultural, 
economic, political, and historical roots of entrepreneurship. Supply side and demand side perspectives. How 
to interpret theories at multiple levels of analysis to understanding entrepreneurship. Examines research on 
new business formation and the likelihood of success. Instructor: Ruef, Yang. One course. C-L: Markets and 
Management Studies
360. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Cultural Anthropology 360; also C-L: Literature 361, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 360, International 
Comparative Studies 369
360S. Global Apple: Life and Death and the Digital Revolution. CZ, EI, SS, STS One course. C-L: 
see Cultural Anthropology 360S; also C-L: Literature 361S, Public Policy 358S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 
360S, International Comparative Studies 369S
361. Social Determinants of US Health Disparities. SS Introduction to how social factors influence 
health and well-being, with a particular focus on contemporary US society. Topics include obesity, aging, 
socioeconomic disadvantage, access to health insurance, public health systems, the role of the media, and 
racial/ethnic and gender inequalities. The course will provide descriptive assessments of health inequalities and 
analytic examinations of the mechanisms through which social factors affect health. Instructor: Read or Hamil. 
One course. C-L: Global Health 340, Human Rights, Global Health
367S. Data Science and Society. R, SS, STS Interdisciplinary field of computational social science, drawing 
from sociology, computer science, and related disciplines. Obtain skills to automate collection of social science 
data from new sources (Twitter, Facebook, Google, etc.), classify unstructured data into discrete variables, 
analyze them using a combination of techniques that includes screen-scraping, natural language processing and 
machine learning. Complex ethical and legal issues that arise when working with these novel sources of data. 
Students develop their imagination about new questions that can be asked with these new data sources. Reading 
and reproducing exemplary studies produced by computational social scientists. Instructor: Bail. One course.
370S. Global Response to the Rise of China. CCI, SS Issues on the impact of globalization on jobs and 
wages in advanced industrialized countries, the trend of regionalization in international political economy, the 
new strategies adopted by both advanced industrialized countries and developing countries under the WTO 
framework, South-North relationship in the era of globalization, the impact of outsourcing through globalization 
production networks on developing countries, comparative analysis of inequality, and other issues faced by 
developing countries today. Instructor: Gao. One course.
374. Pigging Out: The Cultural Politics of Food. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 352; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 206
375S. Global Men and Masculinities. CCI, SS, W One course. C-L: see Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist 
Studies 374S; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 274S, History 229S, Literature 374S
388S. Food, Culture, and Society. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Italian 388S; also C-L: Cultural 
Anthropology 389S
389S. Field Ethics (DukeImmerse). ALP, EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 389S
390. Special Topics in Sociology. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Seminar in Special Topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Sociology (SOCIOL)782

390SA. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Sociology. Topics vary by 
semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Directed reading or individual projects under the supervision of a faculty member, 
resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
409. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 409; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 409, 
International Comparative Studies 409, Latin American Studies 409
425. Intellectual Property and Innovation: Law, Policy & Entrepreneurship. EI, SS, STS One 
course. C-L: see Markets and Management Studies 425; also C-L: Economics 295, Information Science + Studies 
425, Public Policy 425
430S. Women and the Professions. EI, R, SS, W One course. C-L: see Education 430S; also C-L: Ethics 
Elective
450S. The Global Caribbean. CCI, EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 
450S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 450S, International Comparative Studies 418S, Latin American Studies 
450S
471S. Language and Politics: Global Perspectives. CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Linguistics 471S; also 
C-L: Slavic and Eurasian Studies 484S, Public Policy 208S
490. Special Topics in Sociology. One course.
490S. Seminar in Special Topics. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490S-1. Research Seminar: Special Topics. Directed research on a particular theme in a collaborative 
workshop using basic skills to assist in designing, carrying out, and writing up original research. A substantive 
paper with significant analysis and interpretation required. Themes vary semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
495S. Sociology Honors Seminar I. R, SS Honors seminar for senior sociology major. Intensive research 
experience including topic selection, research design, data collection and analysis resulting in substantial, 
original paper. Research guidance and support provided by instructor and faculty advisor. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Febbo, Harris. One course.
496S. Sociology Honors Seminar II. SS, W Continuation of Sociology 495S. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Febbo, Harris, Smith-Lovin. One course.
499S. Sociology Internship. EI, R Open only to sociology majors and minors. Requires eight hours per 
week working in a local business or community organization; specific internship placement arranged with 
instructor to meet student’s interest. Students reflect on their experiences in Blackboard posts and seminar 
discussions. Topics include sociological issues related to organizations, work, diversity and inequality. Research 
paper required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
502S. Race, Class, and Gender in the University. CCI, CZ, EI, SS One course. C-L: see Cultural 
Anthropology 502S; also C-L: History 513S
534. Topics in Population, Health, and Policy. SS, STS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 633; also C-L: 
Global Health 550
541. The United States and the Asian Pacific Region. CCI, CZ, R, SS Asian Pacific region is major 
engine of economic growth in the 21st century likely causing major shift of power and wealth in the world. Study 
relationships between US and various Asian Pacific nations from the end of World War II to present. Focus on 
impact of wars, technological development and economic development. Examine differences in various issues 
such as trade, human rights, environment, territory disputes between US and a variety of Asian Pacific nations. 
Same as Sociology 341, with additional work required. Instructor: Gao. Variable credit.



Sociology (SOCIOL) 783

542S. Understanding Ethical Crisis in Organizations. EI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Study of Ethics 
562S; also C-L: Political Science 502S, Public Policy 558S
556S. Poverty and the Visual. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 570S
570S. Global Responses to the Rise of China. CCI, SS Issues on the impact of globalization on jobs and 
wages in advanced industrialized countries, the trend of regionalization in international political economy, the 
new strategies adopted by both advanced industrialized countries and developing countries under the WTO 
framework, South-North relationship in the era of globalization, the impact of outsourcing through globalization 
production networks on developing countries, comparative analysis of inequality, and other issues faced by 
developing countries today. Instructor: Gao. One course. C-L: Economics 550S
590. Special Topics in Sociology. Substantive, theoretical, or methodological topics vary by semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
594S. Cultural (Con)Fusions of Asians and Africans. CCI, CZ, SS One course. C-L: see African & 
African American Studies 594S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 594S, Latin American Studies 594S
634S. Making Social Policy. R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 563S; also C-L: Child Policy 634S, 
Child Policy Research
636S. Experimental Communities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Visual Arts 554S
641S. Proseminar in Medical Sociology (Special Topics). SS Selected topics in medical sociology: social 
structure and health; social behavior and health; organization and financing of health care; medical sociology 
(for example, social epidemiology, stress and coping, health and aging). Instructor: Burton, Brown, and Gold. 
One course.
642S. Global Inequality Research Seminar. ALP, CCI, R, SS One course. C-L: see Public Policy 645S; 
also C-L: African & African American Studies 642S, Economics 541S, Political Science 642S, Human Rights 
Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 642S, Human Rights
645S. Citizen and Subject in a Neoliberal Age. CCI, EI, SS One course. C-L: see African & African 
American Studies 641S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 641S
647. Surviving Globalization: The Global South and the Development Imagination. CCI, EI, 
SS One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 646; also C-L: International Comparative Studies 
647
651S. Social Change, Markets, and Economy in China. CCI, SS Introduction to recent economic, social, 
and institutional changes in China, with focus on recent (post 1980) periods. Up-to-date descriptive reviews, 
empirical data, and discussions on historical background, current status, and future perspectives. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Economics 542S
664. Research Methods in Japanese (B). CCI, SS One course. C-L: see Japanese 650; also C-L: History 
503
690. Special Topics in Sociology. Substantive, theoretical, or methodological topics vary by semester. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
690S. Seminar in Selected Topics. Substantive, theoretical, or methodological topics. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
699. Qualitative Methods in Sociology. R, SS This course will teach students how to use qualitative 
methods in sociological research. We will focus on interviewing and participant observation. Instructor: Streib. 
One course.

The Major
Major Requirements. Ten courses for the major, including four core courses, one research experience, and 

five electives at or above the 200 level. The core courses are Sociology 110 (Introduction to Sociology), Sociology 
332 (Methods of Social Research), Sociology 333 (Quantitative Analysis of Sociological Data), and Sociology 338 
(Theory and Society). One research experience, typically in senior year, from the following: Sociology 393 (Research 
Independent Study), Sociology 490S (Research Seminar: Special Topics), or Sociology 495S and Sociology 496S 



 Sociology (SOCIOL)784

(Sociology Honors Seminar I & II). Five electives at or above the 200 level. Students may substitute any 100-level 
or above statistical science course for Sociology 333 with the consent of the director of undergraduate studies. No 
Advanced Placement credits and no more than two transfer credits may count toward the major.

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
The department offers work leading to Graduation with Distinction through the Honors Thesis Program. 

This is a two-semester class sequence (Sociology 495S and 496S) that is available to juniors with at least a 3.3 
GPA and an endorsement of a faculty member. Completion of Sociology 332 (Methods of Social Research) and 
Sociology 333 (Quantitative Analysis of Sociological Data or equivalent) is strongly encouraged prior to enrolling 
in the Honors Program. Students in this program conduct original research that results in a substantive paper 
resembling what might appear in a professional journal. The program captures the often nonlinear process of 
research: how to translate an abstract idea into a sociological question that can be answered, learning to situate a 
topic among existing literature, identifying appropriate research methods, and applying for institutional review 
board approval.

The Minor
The department offers two minors, one in sociology and one in medical sociology. 

The Minor in Sociology
Requirements: Five courses, four of which must be at or above the 200 level. Only one transfer credit and 

no Advanced Placement credits may count toward the minor. Note: pre-law, pre-med and pre-business majors 
may want to consider courses from the Pre-Professional Course Concentrations.

The Minor in Medical Sociology 
Requirements: One of the following core courses (the other course can also be used as an elective):
• Sociology 250: Medical Sociology
• Sociology 361: Social Determinants of US Health Disparities
And four of the following electives: 
• Sociology 212: Gender and Global Health
• Sociology 255: Sociology of Immigration and Health 
• Sociology 257: From Madness to Mental Disorders: Sociology of Mental Health 
• Sociology 260: Psychosocial Aspects of Human Development
• Sociology 263: Aging and Health 
• Sociology 264: Death and Dying 
• Sociology 265: Drug Use and Abuse: Getting High in the United States
• Sociology 349: Sexuality and Society

NOTE: Only one transfer credit and no Advanced Placement credits may count toward either minor.

Spanish
For courses in Spanish, see Romance Studies on page 736.

Statistical Science
Professor Reiter, Chair; Professor Herring, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Belloni, Carin, Clark, 
Clyde, Dunson, Herring, Hoff, Mattingly, Miller, Mukherjee, Reiter, Rudin, West, Winkler, and Wolpert; Asso-
ciate Professors Li, Ma, Schmidler, Tokdar, and Wu; Assistant Professors Chen, Heller, Mak, Reeves, Steorts, 
Volfovsky, and Xu; Professors Emeriti Berger, Burdick, Gelfand, and Sacks; Professor of the Practice Banks; As-
sociate Professor of the Practice Çetinkaya-Rundel; Assistant Professors of the Practice Jiang, Rundel, Santo, and 
Tackett; Research Professor Iversen; Associate Research Professor Chan; Senior Lecturer Dasmohapatra

A major and a minor are available in this department.
The Department of Statistical Science coordinates teaching and research in the statistical sciences at 

Duke University. In its teaching and research, the department’s faculty members emphasize modern statistical 



Statistical Science (STA) 785

methods involving computationally intensive stochastic modeling, coupled with interdisciplinary applications 
in many fields. The department also offers courses in basic statistical and data science methods and advanced 
mathematical statistics.

Courses in Statistical Science (STA)
20. General Statistics. Credit for Advanced Placement on the basis of College Board Examination in 
statistical science. One course.
30. Basic Statistics and Quantitative Literacy. QS Statistical concepts involved in making inferences, 
decisions, and predictions from data. Emphasis on applications, not formal technique. Prerequisite: Must have 
taken placement test and placed in Statistics 30. See website for placement info. Director of undergraduate 
studies consent required. Not open to students with Statistics AP credit, Math AP credit, or credit for Math105L 
or higher. Instructor: Staff. One course.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
101L. Data Analysis and Statistical Inference. QS, R, STS Introduction to statistics as a science of 
understanding and analyzing data. Themes include data collection, exploratory analysis, inference, and 
modeling. Focus on principles underlying quantitative research in social sciences, humanities, and public policy. 
Research projects teach the process of scientific discovery and synthesis and critical evaluation of research and 
statistical arguments. Readings give perspective on why in 1950, S. Wilks said, “Statistical thinking will one day 
be as necessary a qualification for efficient citizenship as the ability to read and write.” See department website 
for placement information. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 100 or above. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
101LA. Data Analysis and Statistical Inference. QS, R, STS Introduction to statistics as a science 
of understanding and analyzing data. Themes include data collection, exploratory analysis, inference, and 
modeling. Focus on principles underlying quantitative research in social sciences, humanities, and public policy. 
Research projects teach the process of scientific discovery and synthesis and critical evaluation of research and 
statistical arguments. Readings give perspective on why in 1950, S. Wilks said “Statistical thinking will one 
day be as necessary a qualification for efficient citizenship as the ability to read and write.” See department 
website for placement information. Not open to students with credit for Statistical Science 102 or higher. Taught 
in Beaufort at Duke Marine Lab. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies, Marine 
Sciences
102L. Introductory Biostatistics. QS, R, STS Reading and interpretation of statistical analysis from life 
and health sciences. Topics include: basic concepts and tools of probability, estimation, inference, decisions 
analysis, and modeling. Emphasizes role of biostatistics in modern society. See department website for 
placement information. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 100 or above. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
102LA. Introduction to Biostatistics. QS, R, STS Reading and interpretation of statistical analysis from 
life and health sciences. Topics include: basic concepts and tools of probability, estimation, inference, decisions 
analysis, and modeling. Emphasizes role of biostatistics in modern society. Taught in Beaufort at Duke Marine 
Lab. See department website for placement information. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 
100 or above. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
110FS. Focus Program - Introductory Special Topics in Statistics. QS This is a seminar course for 
focus students. Topics vary every semester. Mathematics 21 is a prerequisite. Instructor: Staff. One course.
111L. Probability and Statistical Inference. QS Basic laws of probability—random events, independence 
and dependence, expectations, Bayes theorem. Discrete and continuous random variables, density, and 
distribution functions. Binomial and normal models for observational data. Introduction to maximum likelihood 
estimation and Bayesian inference. One- and two-sample mean problems, simple linear regression, multiple 
linear regression with two explanatory variables. Applications in economics, quantitative social sciences, and 
natural sciences emphasized. Not open to students who have taken 100-level or higher Statistical Science course. 
Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 21 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information 
Science + Studies
112FS. Better Living Through Data Science: Exploration and Predictive Modeling. QS, 
STS Combines techniques from statistics, math, computer science, and social sciences, to learn how to use 



 Statistical Science (STA)786

data to understand natural phenomena, explore patterns, model outcomes, and make predictions. Case studies 
include examples from election forecasts, movie reviews, and online dating match algorithms. Discussions 
around reproducibility, data sharing, data privacy will accompany these case studies. Gain experience in data 
wrangling and munging, exploratory data analysis, predictive modeling, and data visualization, and effective 
communication of results. Course will focus on R statistical computing language. No computing background 
necessary. Open only to students in the Focus Program. Prerequisite: Mathematics 21. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
115FS. Mathematics of Data Science. QS, STS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 163FS
130L. Probability and Statistics in Engineering. QS Introduction to probability, independence, 
conditional independence, and Bayes’ theorem. Discrete and continuous, univariate and multivariate 
distributions. Linear and nonlinear transformations of random variables. Classical and Bayesian inference, 
decision theory, and comparison of hypotheses. Experimental design, statistical quality control, and other 
applications in engineering. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 111, 250D, or 611. 
Recommended prerequisite: Mathematics 212 or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Information 
Science + Studies
199L. Introduction to Data Science and Statistical Thinking. QS, R, STS Intro to data science 
and statistical thinking. Learn to explore, visualize, and analyze data to understand natural phenomena, 
investigate patterns, model outcomes, and make predictions, and do so in a reproducible and shareable manner. 
Gain experience in data wrangling and munging, exploratory data analysis, predictive modeling, and data 
visualization, and effective communication of results. Work on problems and case studies inspired by and based 
on real-world questions and data. The course will focus on the R statistical computing language. No statistical or 
computing background is necessary. Not open to students who have taken a 100-level Statistical Science course, 
Statistical Science 210, or a Statistical Science course numbered 300 or above. Instructor: Staff. One course.
210L. Regression Analysis. QS, R Extensive study of regression modeling. Multiple regression, weighted 
least squares, logistic regression, log-linear models, analysis of variance, model diagnostics and selection. 
Emphasis on applications. Examples drawn from a variety of fields. Prerequisite: 100-level Statistical Science 
course or Statistical Science 230 or Statistical Science 240L. Interested students with a different background 
should discuss and seek instructor consent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
230. Probability. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 230; also C-L: Information Science + Studies
231. Advanced Introduction to Probability. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 340
240L. Probability for Statistical Inference, Modeling, and Data Analysis. QS Probability models, 
random variables with discrete and continuous distributions. Marginal, joint, and conditional distributions. 
Expectations, functions of random variables, central limit theorem. Estimators and sampling distributions, 
method of moments, and maximum likelihood estimation. Prerequisite: Mathematics 22, 112L, 122, 122L, 
202D, 212, 222, or graduate-student standing. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 230/
Mathematics 230 or Mathematics 340/Statistical Science 231. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Mathematics 
228L
250D. Statistics. QS An introduction to the concepts, theory, and application of statistical inference, 
including the structure of statistical problems, probability modeling, data analysis and statistical computing, and 
linear regression. Inference from the viewpoint of Bayesian statistics, with some discussion of sampling theory 
methods and comparative inference. Applications to problems in various fields. Prerequisite: Mathematics 202, 
212, or 222, and Statistical Science 230 or Mathematics 340. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Mathematics 
342D, Information Science + Studies
291. Independent Study. Directed readings or work in a field of special interest under the supervision of a 
faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper, project, or written report covering a previously 
approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
322. Study Design: Design of Surveys and Causal Studies. QS Investigation of study designs collecting 
data and their implications for statistical inference. Design and analysis of surveys of populations, including 
stratification, clustering, multi-stage sampling, design-based inference, considerations when analyzing 
convenience samples and big data. Design and analysis of causal studies including randomized experiments, 



Statistical Science (STA) 787

blocking, fractional factorial designs, non-randomized studies, propensity score analysis. Applications involving 
big data, health, policy, natural and social sciences. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 522. 
Recommended prerequisite: Statistical Science 210, 521, or the equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
323D. Statistical Computing. QS, R A practical introduction to statistical programming focusing on the R 
programming language. Students will engage with the programming challenges inherent in the various stages 
of modern statistical analyses including everything from data collection/aggregation/cleaning to visualization 
and exploratory analysis to statistical model building and evaluation. This course places an emphasis on 
modern approaches/best practices for programming including: source control, collaborative coding, literate and 
reproducible programming, and distributed and multicore computing. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 210 and 
Statistical Science 240L or 230. Instructor: Staff. One course.
325L. Machine Learning and Data Mining. QS The rapid growth of digitalized data and the 
computer power available to analyze it has created immense opportunities for both machine learning and 
data mining. This course introduces machine learning and data mining methods. Topics covered include 
information retrieval, clustering, classification, modern regression, cross validation, boosting and bagging. 
Course emphasizes selection of appropriate methods and justification of choice, use of programming for 
implementation of the method, and evaluation and effective communication of results in data analysis reports. 
Prerequisite: (Statistical Science 210 and Statistical Science 240L) or (Statistical Science 210, Statistical Science 
250D (may be taken concurrently), and either Statistical Science 230/Mathematics 230 or Mathematics 340/
Statistical Science 231). Instructor: Staff. One course.
340. Introduction to Statistical Decision Analysis. QS Quantitative methods for decision making under 
uncertainty. Probability theory, personal probabilities and utilities, decision trees, ROC curves, sensitivity 
analysis, dominant strategies, Bayesian networks and influence diagrams, Markov models and time discounting, 
cost-effectiveness analysis, multi-agent decision making, game theory. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 230, 231, 
or 240L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
360L. Bayesian Inference and Modern Statistical Methods. QS, STS Principles of data analysis and 
advanced statistical modeling. Bayesian inference, prior and posterior distributions, multi-level models, model 
checking and selection, stochastic simulation by Markov Chain Monte Carlo. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 
210 and (Statistical Science 230, 240L, or 231) and (Mathematics 202, 202D, 212, or 222). Prerequisite or 
corequisite: Mathematics 216, 218, or 221. Instructor: Staff. One course.
391. Independent Study. Directed readings or work in a field of special interest under the supervision of a 
faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper, project, or written report covering a previously 
approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
410L. Multilevel and Hierarchical Models. QS Variance component models with fixed and random 
effects. Multilevel and hierarchical models for longitudinal and/or clustered data. Focus on model fitting and 
interpretation. Maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference and computation. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 
360. Recommended prerequisite: R programming skills. Instructor: Staff. One course.
432. Theory and Methods of Statistical Learning and Inference. QS Estimators and properties 
(efficiency, consistency, sufficiency); loss functions. Fisher information, asymptotic properties and distributions 
of estimators. Exponential families. Point and interval estimation, delta method. Neyman-Pearson lemma; 
likelihood ratio tests; multiple testing; design and the analysis of variance (ANOVA). High-dimensional 
data; statistical regularization and sparsity; penalty and prior formulations; model selection. Resampling 
methods; principal component analysis, mixture models. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 240L, 230, or 231. 
Recommended prerequisite: Statistical Science 210, 360, and (Mathematics 221, 218, or 216). Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: Mathematics 343
440L. Case Studies in the Practice of Statistics. QS, R, W Students apply statistical analysis skills to 
in-depth data analysis projects ranging across diverse application areas including but not limited to energy, 



 Statistical Science (STA)788

environmental sustainability, global health, information and culture, brain sciences, and social networks. 
Students practice cutting-edge statistical methods and communicate their results both technically and non-
technically via presentations and written reports. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 360. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
444L. Statistical Modeling of Spatial and Time Series Data. QS, R Introduction to Bayesian modeling 
for data with spatial and/or time dependence. Exploratory analysis of spatial (point referenced and areal) and 
time series data. Gaussian processes and generalizations. Extending hierarchical Bayesian linear models and 
generalized linear models. Spatial models: CAR, SAR, kriging and time series models: ARM, ARMA, dynamic 
linear models. Computational methods for model fitting and diagnostics. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 360 or 
601 or 602L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
450L. Theory and Methods for the Analysis of Social Networks. QS, STS Introduction to basic 
principles of analyzing relational data. Consider deterministic and probabilistic specifications of networks and 
graphs, studying structural blockmodels, the Erdos-Renyi model, the exponential random graph model, the 
stochastic blockmodel, generalizations to latent space models and to more complex relational data. Development 
of these models and practical understanding of how to fit them. There is no book, lectures will be supplemented 
with discussions of relevant papers. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 360. Instructor: Staff. One course.
465. Introduction to High Dimensional Data Analysis. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 465; also 
C-L: Computer Science 445
470S. Introduction to Statistical Consulting. EI, QS, R, W Immerses students into real world 
consulting, exposing them to all aspects of research including data collection, modeling, and evaluating results. 
Through campus-wide consulting program, students work with researchers from various disciplines providing 
recommendations for statistical methodologies appropriate for their research. Projects examined through lens 
of research ethics underlying data collection, model assumptions, analysis, reproducibility, and reporting of 
results. Case studies such as the recent Potti case highlight what can go wrong in interdisciplinary research 
when researchers are not vigilant of the highest ethical standards. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 360 or 601. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
490. Special Topics in Statistics. Special topics not covered in core courses and more advanced topics 
related to current research directions in statistical science. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
491. Independent Study. Directed readings or work in a field of special interest under the supervision of a 
faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper, project, or written report covering a previously 
approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Prerequisite: Statistics 360. Instructor: Staff. One course.
497S. Research Seminar in Statistical Science I. QS, R Statistical and mathematical underpinnings of 
methodological research in statistical science. Student presentations of their statistical research in collaboration 
with, and under the supervision of, a DSS faculty mentor. Offered only in fall semesters. Department consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
498S. Honors Thesis Seminar. Forum for conducting original research culminating in a substantive 
research project suitable for submission as an honors thesis. Department consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
Half course.
503. Choice Theory. One course. C-L: see Business Administration 913
504. Statistical Genetics. One course. C-L: see Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 541
521L. Predictive Modeling and Statistical Learning. QS An introduction to statistical learning methods 
for prediction and inference. Topics include exploratory data analysis and visualization, linear and generalized 
linear models, model selection, penalized estimation and shrinkage methods including Lasso, ridge regression 
and Bayesian regression, regression and classification based on decision trees, Bayesian Model Averaging and 



Statistical Science (STA) 789

ensemble methods, and time permitting, smoothing splines, support vector machines, neural nets or other 
advanced topics. The R programming language and applications used throughout. Instructor consent required. 
Corequisite: Statistical Science 323D or 523L and Statistical Science 360, 601, or 602L. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
522. Study Design: Design of Surveys and Causal Studies. QS Investigation of study designs collecting 
data and their implications for statistical inference. Design and analysis of surveys of populations, including 
stratification, clustering, multi-stage sampling, design-based inference, considerations when analyzing 
convenience samples and big data. Design and analysis of causal studies including randomized experiments, 
blocking, fractional factorial designs, non-randomized studies, propensity score analysis. Applications involving 
big data, health, policy, natural and social sciences. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 322. 
Recommended prerequisite: Statistical Science 210, 521L, or an equivalent course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
523L. Programming for Statistical Science. QS Statistical programming, computation using selected 
languages and environments (Python, R, Matlab, and/or C/C++) and interfaces with custom code development 
for statistical models. Best practices and software development for reproducible results, selecting topics from: 
use of markup languages, understanding data structures, design of graphics, object oriented programming, 
vectorized code, scoping, documenting code, profiling and debugging, building modular code, and version 
control- all in contexts of specific applied statistical analyses. Instructor consent required. Prerequisite: 
Statistical Science 360, 601L, 602L, or 611 (or concurrent enrollment in any of these courses). Not open to 
students who have taken Statistical Science 323D. Instructor: Staff. One course.
531. Advanced Bayesian Inference and Stochastic Modeling. QS Art and science of building graphical 
models and stochastic simulation methods for inference and prediction. Mixture models, networks, and other 
latent variable probability models, i.e. hidden Markov models. Review of discrete and continuous multivariate 
distributions used in building graphical models, tools of linear algebra and probability calculus. Aspects of 
Monte Carlo methodology and related dynamical modeling theory. Statistical computing using Matlab or R. 
Instructor consent required. Prerequisites: Statistics 521L, 523L, 601. Instructor: Staff. One course.
532. Theory of Statistical Inference. QS Core mathematical foundations of classical and Bayesian 
statistical inference. Theory of point and interval estimation and testing based on efficiency, consistency, 
sufficiency and robustness. Maximum likelihood, moments and non-parametric methods based on exact or 
large sample distribution theory; associated EM, asymptotic normality and bootstrap computational techniques. 
Theoretical aspects of objective Bayesian inference, prediction, and testing. Selected additional topics drawn 
from, for example, multiparameter testing, contingency tables, multiplicity studies. Instructor consent required. 
Recommended prerequisite: Statistical Science 521L, 523L, 601. Instructor: Staff. One course.
540L. Case Studies in Statistical and Data Science. QS, R, W Students apply statistical analysis skills 
to in-depth data analysis projects in a variety of areas of application. Students design and implement a data 
analysis plan based on substantive questions or hypotheses and communicate their results both technically and 
non-technically in oral presentations and written reports. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 360, 601, or 602. Not 
open to students who have taken Statistical Science 440 or Statistical Science 723. Instructor: Staff. One course.
561D. Probabilistic Machine Learning. QS Introduction to concepts in probabilistic machine learning with 
a focus on discriminative and hierarchical generative models. Topics include directed and undirected graphical 
models, kernel methods, exact and approximate parameter estimation methods, and structure learning. 
Prerequisite: Linear algebra, Statistical Science 250 or Statistical Science 611. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 682D, Computer Science 571D
563. Information Theory. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 587
571. Advanced Stochastic Modeling and Machine Learning. QS Art and science of building advanced 
probabilistic models. EM and stochastic based algorithms will be discussed in detail for inference and 
prediction. Topics include mixture models and latent variable models, i.e. hidden Markov models. Review of 
discrete and continuous multivariate distributions used in building graphical models, tools of linear algebra 
and probability calculus. Aspects of Monte Carlo methodology and related dynamical modeling theory and 
algorithms/computation. Understanding why and when models and methods work or break will be a focus. 
Prerequisite: Statistical Science 601 or 602L, and Statistical Science 532. Instructor: Staff. One course.
581. ProSeminar: Becoming a Statistical Scientist. Statistical paradigms and current directions, 



 Statistical Science (STA)790

communication of statistical ideas and arguments, statistical ethics, overview of study designs, building a 
statistical network, professional societies, developing a web/social media presence, career paths. Instructor 
consent required. Instructor: Staff.
582L. DataFest. Students work in teams to solve this year’s big data challenge on campus. Engages students 
with the data analysis process from the definition of research/analysis questions, to in-depth exploratory 
analysis, to formal modeling and computational developments, to drawing conclusions based on their findings. 
Students interact with multiple faculty and expert advisors, and develop and present their findings to a panel of 
professors and professionals. Prerequisite: Statistics 531, 532, 523L (or co-registration). Instructor: Staff.
583. Internship Writing. The aim of this course is to work with materials (report + presentation) from 
summer internship experience and turn them into products that are admissible for a portfolio defense. The 
course aims to help students produce materials that meet the bar of scientific writing without violating any non-
disclosure agreements you may have signed. The course starts with an initial written piece from every student 
that gives a good summary of their internship project(s), then works through several rounds of revision with 
detailed feedback and assistance from course instructor. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff.
601L. Bayesian and Modern Statistical Data Analysis. QS Principles of data analysis and modern 
statistical modeling. Exploratory data analysis. Introduction to Bayesian inference, prior and posterior 
distributions, predictive distributions, hierarchical models, model checking and selection, missing data, 
introduction to stochastic simulation by Markov chain Monte Carlo using a higher level statistical language such 
as R or Matlab. Applications drawn from various disciplines. Not recommended for students with credit for 
Statistical Science 360. Recommended prerequisite: Statistical Science 210, 240, or both Statistical Science 230 
and 250. Instructor: Staff. One course.
602L. Bayesian and Modern Statistics Analysis. QS Principles of data analysis and modern statistical 
modeling. Exploratory data analysis. Introduction to Bayesian inference, prior and posterior distributions, 
hierarchical models, model checking and selection, missing data, introduction to stochastic simulation by 
Markov chain Monte Carlo using a higher level statistical language such as R or Matlab. Applications drawn 
from various disciplines. Not open to students who have taken Statistical Science 360. Prerequisite: Statistical 
Science 611 or the following: Statistical Science 210 and (Statistical Science 230 or 240L) and (Mathematics 202, 
202D, 212, or 222) and (Mathematics 216, 218, or 221, any of which may be taken concurrently). Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
610L. Multilevel and Hierarchical Models. QS Variance component models with fixed and random 
effects. Multilevel and hierarchical models for longitudinal and/or clustered data. Focus on model fitting and 
interpretation. Maximum likelihood and Bayesian inference and computation. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 
360, 601, or 602L. Recommended prerequisite: R programming skills. Not open to students who have taken 
Statistical Science 410L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
611. Introduction to Mathematical Statistics. QS Formal introduction to basic theory and methods of 
probability and statistics: probability and sample spaces, independence, conditional probability and Bayes’ 
theorem; random variables, distributions, moments and transformations. Parametric families of distributions 
and central limit theorem. Sampling distributions, traditional methods of estimation and hypothesis testing. 
Elements of likelihood and Bayesian inference. Basic discrete and continuous statistical models. Not open to 
students who have had Statistical Science 250/Mathematics 342. Instructor: Staff. One course.
612. Numerical Analysis. QS, R One course. C-L: see Computer Science 520; also C-L: Mathematics 565
613. Statistical Methods for Computational Biology. One course. C-L: see Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics 540
614. Computational Structural Biology. QS, R One course. C-L: see Computer Science 664; also C-L: 
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 550
621. Applied Stochastic Processes. QS One course. C-L: see Mathematics 541
622. Statistical Data Mining. QS Introduction to data mining, including multivariate nonparametric 
regression, classification, and cluster analysis. Topics include the curse of dimensionality, the bootstrap, cross-
validation, search (especially model selection), smoothing, the backfitting algorithm, and boosting. Emphasis 
on regression methods (e.g., neural networks, wavelets, the LASSO, and LARS), classifications methods (e.g., 



Statistical Science (STA) 791

CART, Support vector machines, and nearest-neighbor methods), and cluster analysis (e.g., self-organizing 
maps, D-means clustering, and minimum spanning trees). Theory illustrated through analysis of classical data 
sets. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 250. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Computer Science 579
623. Statistical Decision Theory. QS Formulation of decision problems; criteria for optimality: maximum 
expected utility and minimax. Axiomatic foundations of expected utility; coherence and the axioms of 
probability (the Dutch Book theorem). Elicitation of probabilities and utilities. The value of information. 
Estimation and hypothesis testing as decision problems: risk, sufficiency, completeness and admissibility. Stein 
estimation. Bayes decision functions and their properties. Minimax analysis and improper priors. Decision 
theoretic Bayesian experimental design. Combining evidence and group decisions. Prerequisite: Statistical 
Science 732 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
640. Causal Inference. QS Statistical issues in causality and methods for estimating causal effects. 
Randomized designs and alternative designs and methods for when randomization is infeasible: matching 
methods, propensity scores, longitudinal treatments, regression discontinuity, instrumental variables, and 
principal stratification. Methods are motivated by examples from social sciences, policy and health sciences. 
Prerequisite: Statistical 521L or 721. Instructor: Staff. One course.
641. Statistical Learning and Bayesian Nonparametrics. QS Nonparametric Bayesian models and 
methods for complex data analyses with non-linearity adjustment, flexible borrowing of information, local 
uncertainty quantification and interaction discovery. Focuses on computationally and theoretically efficient 
nonparametric regression techniques based on advanced Gaussian process models, with motivating applications 
in causal inference and big data genomics. Includes several illustrative examples with R codes. Basic coverage of 
asymptotic theory and MCMC and greedy algorithms. Prerequisite: Statistics 531, 532, 523L. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
642. Time Series and Dynamic Models. QS Statistical models for modeling, monitoring, assessing 
and forecasting time series. Univariate and multivariate dynamic models; state space modeling approaches; 
Bayesian inference and prediction; computational methods for fast data analysis, learning and prediction; time 
series decomposition; dynamic model and time series structure assessment. Routine use of statistical software 
for time series applications. Applied studies motivated by problems and time series data from a range of applied 
fields including economics, finance, neuroscience, climatology, social networks, and others. Instructor consent 
required. Prerequisite: Statistics 531, 532, 523L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
643. Modern Design of Experiments. QS Classical and Bayesian design notions and techniques—
experimental units, randomization, treatments, blocking and restrictions to randomization, and utility of 
designs. Optimal sample size determination for estimation and testing. Factorial and fractional factorial designs, 
response surface methods, conjoint designs, sequential designs and bandit problems used in on-line advertising. 
Design and modeling of complex computer experiments. Designs for multiple objectives. Computational 
algorithms for finding optimal designs. Prerequisite: Statistics 531, 532, 523L. Instructor: Staff. One course.
644L. Statistical Modeling of Spatial and Time Series Data. QS, R Introduction to Bayesian modeling 
for data with spatial and/or time dependence. Exploratory analysis of spatial (point referenced and areal) and 
time series data. Gaussian processes and generalizations. Extending hierarchical Bayesian linear models and 
generalized linear models. Spatial models: CAR, SAR, kriging and time series models: ARM, ARMA, dynamic 
linear models. Computational methods for model fitting and diagnostics. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 360 or 
601/602L or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
650L. Theory and Methods for the Analysis of Social Networks. QS Introduction to basic principles 
of analyzing relational data. Consider deterministic and probabilistic specifications of networks and graphs, 
studying structural blockmodels, the Erdos-Renyi model, the exponential random graph model, the stochastic 
blockmodel, generalizations to latent space models and to more complex relational data. Development of these 
models and practical understanding of how to fit them. There is no book, lectures will be supplemented with 
discussions of relevant papers. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 601 or 602L. Corequisite: Statistical Science 532 
or 732. Instructor: Staff. One course.
663L. Statistical Computing and Computation. QS Statistical modeling and machine learning involving 
large data sets and challenging computation. Data pipelines and data bases, big data tools, sequential algorithms 
and subsampling methods for massive data sets, efficient programming for multi-core and cluster machines, 
including topics drawn from GPU programming, cloud computing, Map/Reduce and general tools of distributed 



 Statistical Science (STA)792

computing environments. Intense use of statistical and data manipulation software will be required. Data from 
areas such as astronomy, genomics, finance, social media, networks, neuroscience. Instructor consent required. 
Prerequisite: Statistics 521L, 523L; Statistics 531, 532 (or co-registration). Instructor: Staff. One course.
665. Statistical Programming for Big Data. This course will extend the foundation laid in software 
tools for data science to allow for efficient computing involving very large data sets. This course will explore 
the use appropriate algorithms and data structures for intensive computations, improving computational 
performance by use of native code compilation, use of parallel computing to accelerate intensive computations, 
use appropriate algorithms and data structures for massive data set, and use of distributed computing to process 
massive data sets. Prerequisite: Biostatistics 821 or permission of the director of graduate studies. Instructor: 
Staff. Half course.
671D. Machine Learning - Introductory PhD Level. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 671D; 
also C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 687D
690. Special Topics in Statistics. Prerequisite: Statistical Science 611 or consent of instructor. Pass/Fail 
grading only. Instructor: Staff. One course.
690-40. Topics in Probability Theory. One course. C-L: see Mathematics 690-40
693. Research Independent Study. R Directed reading and research for master’s students. Consent of 
instructor and director of master’s program required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

The Major
The major in statistical science provides students with exposure to modern statistical reasoning and data 

science principles as well as the skills needed to develop, analyze, and utilize statistical techniques for addressing 
quantitative, data-based problems in a wide array of application domains, including but not limited to natural and 
social sciences and the humanities. The course of study exposes students to a broad range of statistical methods 
using tools from mathematical and computational sciences. Students who complete the major in statistical science 
will be well prepared for careers in technology and business, where they must appreciate and accommodate 
uncertainty in their decision-making, and for further study and embarking on research in science, law, business, 
or other fields. 

As part of the course of study, majors in statistical science can complete a research project under the 
supervision of a faculty member. These projects can involve the analysis of complex data, the development of new 
methods or theory, or the extension and evaluation of existing techniques. The director of undergraduate studies 
can facilitate linking majors to a research mentor, who works with students to develop and complete the research 
project. Students earn credit for their research by taking Statistical Science 393 or 493 (up to one independent 
study can be used towards the major or minor, with prior approval of the director of undergraduate studies).

For the AB Degree 
Prerequisites. Mathematics 21 (or 111L), 122 (or 112L), 212 (or 222 or 202), and 221 (or 216 or 218). 

Computer Science 101L or 102L or 201 or Engineering 103L.
Major Requirements. Statistical Science 240L/Mathematics 228L or Statistical Science 230/Mathematics 

230 or Statistical Science 231/Mathematics 340; Statistical Science 432/Mathematics 343 ; Statistical Science 210; 
Statistical Science 360; Statistical Science 440. Three additional courses above Statistical Science 240L (excluding 
601, 602L, and 611); Statistical Science 199 is allowed. Up to one independent study in statistical science can be 
used toward the major. Transfer credit for up to one core or two elective courses can be used toward the major. A 
maximum of two grades of D+, D, or D- can be counted toward the degree.

For the BS Degree
Prerequisites. Mathematics 21 (or 111L), 122 (or 112L), 212 (or 222 or 202), and 221 (or 216 or 218). 

Computer Science 101L or 102L or 201 or Engineering 103L.
Major Requirements. Statistical Science 240L/Mathematics 228L or Statistical Science 230/Mathematics 

230 or Statistical Science 231/Mathematics 340; Statistical Science 432/Mathematics 343; Statistical Science 210; 
Statistical Science 360. Statistical Science 440. Four additional courses above Statistical Science 240L (excluding 
601, 602L, and 611), one of which must be a quantitatively focused course outside the department; Statistical 
Science 199 is allowed. Up to one independent study in statistical science can be used toward the major. One 



Sustainability Engagement (SUSTAIN)  793

300-level or higher course that is preapproved by the director of undergraduate studies in an applied quantitative 
area other than statistical science, such as computer science, engineering, mathematics, one of the natural 
sciences, or one of the quantitative social sciences. Transfer credit for up to one core or two elective courses can be 
used toward the major. Students pursuing Graduation with Distinction must complete a year-long honor’s thesis 
in their senior year of study. A maximum of two grades of D+, D, or D- can be counted toward the degree.

Students may elect to complete requirements in specified areas of concentration. Currently available 
areas of concentration in the statistical science major (BS) are data science and mathematical statistics. These 
concentrations are subsets of the major with specific choices of prerequisites and major courses. For the data 
science concentration: the linear algebra prerequisite must be Mathematics 218 or 221; of the four electives, at 
least two should come from the group of Statistical Science 199L, 322, 323D, 325L, 393/493 with a data science 
focus (subject to the approval of the director of undergraduate studies), 465 , 561D, or 571, at least one of those 
two must come from the subgroup of Statistical Science 323D, 325L, 465, 561D, or 571, and one course should 
come from the group of Computer Science 216, 316, 330, 370D, 371D, 516, or 570 with others possible with 
pre-approval by the director of undergraduate studies. For the mathematical statistics concentration: the linear 
algebra prerequisite must be Mathematics 221; the multivariate calculus prerequisite must be Mathematics 212 
or 222; and one of the four electives must be Mathematics 431 or 531.

The Minor 
The minor is designed to provide students in other disciplines with opportunities for exposure and skill 

development in advanced statistical methods. These are useful for conducting research in applied subjects, and 
they are appealing to employers and graduate schools seeking students with quantitative skills. The minor is 
flexible, so that students from most majors can find a path to the minor that serves their needs. A maximum of 
two grades of D+, D, or D- can be counted toward the minor.

Prerequisites. Mathematics 21 (or 111L), 122 (or 112L), and 212 (or 202).
Requirements. Statistical Science 240L/Mathematics 228L or Statistical Science 230/Mathematics 230 

or Statistical Science 231/Mathematics 340; Statistical Science 432/Mathematics 343; Statistical Science 210. 
Two additional courses in Statistical Science at or above the 100 level, only one of which can be from 100 level.

Sustainability Engagement 
Assistant Professor of the Practice Clark (Environment) and Associate Research Professor Philipsen (Public Pol-
icy), Co-Directors 

A Type 2 experiential certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The goal of this program is to provide undergraduates with an opportunity to engage deeply with complex 

interconnections involved in sustainability-related challenges. The program requires students to connect multiple 
disciplines, such as environmental science, economics, public policy, and/or social justice. The program will foster 
critical analysis, systems thinking, and practical skills to create engaged leaders in sustainability. 

Certificate Requirements 
In order to complete the certificate, students must take four courses, complete two substantial experiences, 

and develop an e-Portfolio. The four courses include a gateway course, Sustainability Engagement 245 
(Sustainability: Theory and Practice, taught in the spring) or Sustainability Engagement 276 (Denial, Faith, 
Reason: Sustainability and Survival, taught in the fall); two elective courses; and the capstone, Sustainability 
Engagement 498S (Building A Sustainable Tomorrow). The experiences must include one exceeding 300 hours 
and one exceeding 150 hours. The electives and experiences must share a chosen theme in the field of sustainability 
engagement that relates to three key dimensions of sustainability: the environment, economics, and social equity. 
The course of study and engagement experiences must be approved by the student’s Oversight Committee. For 
information about the certificate, visit https://sustainability.duke.edu/academics/certificate. The certificate 
directors and advisory committee are available for additional information and guidance. Contact dirk.philipsen@
duke.edu or cclark@duke.edu for assistance.

Course in Sustainability Engagement (SUSTAIN) 
245. The Theory and Practice of Sustainability. EI, NS, R, SS, STS Theories and practices of 
sustainability explored with application to the campus environment, including economic, social and 

https://sustainability.duke.edu/academics/certificate
mailto:dirk.philipsen%40duke.edu?subject=
mailto:dirk.philipsen%40duke.edu?subject=
mailto:cclark%40duke.edu?subject=


 Theater Studies (THEATRST)794

environmental factors, and a local to global reach. The Duke campus is used as a case study to illustrate 
institutional practices including building design and operations, utility supply and consumption, carbon offsets 
design and calculation, transportation, water, sustainability education and communication, behavior change, 
waste production and recycling, and procurement. In a service-learning project, students might perform 
sustainability inventories and cost/benefit analyses, or gather behavior change data. Instructor: Clark. One 
course. C-L: Environment 245, Energy and the Environment
276. Denial, Faith, Reason: Sustainability and Survival. EI One course. C-L: see Public Policy 284; also 
C-L: Study of Ethics 285, Economics 285, Environment 276, History 325
498S. Building a Sustainable Tomorrow. SS, STS Capstone for Certificate in Sustainability Engagement 
open to senior undergraduates who have completed all other Certificate requirements. Interdisciplinary insights 
to shed light on major contemporary debates in sustainability and world’s most pressing problems. Synthesis 
and integration of ideas, concepts, and themes from their academic coursework and experiential activities with 
each dimension of sustainability, enhancing their systems analysis of chosen theme. Classes include discussion, 
readings, and guest speakers on topics in sustainability. May include fieldwork and other learning experiences 
relevant to sustainability. Held in Spring semesters. Open only to Sustainability Engagement certificate 
students. Prerequisite: Sustainability Engagement 245/Environment 245. Instructor: Clark and Philipsen. One 
course. C-L: Environment 498S, Public Policy 473S

Theater Studies
Associate Professor of the Practice Bend, Chair; Professor Gobert, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Profes-
sors Beckwith, Gobert, and Lee; Associate Professor Hadjioannou; Assistant Professors D’Alessandro and Rogers; 
Professor Emeritus Clum; Professors of the Practice Bell, Hemphill, McAuliffe, and Storer; Associate Professor of 
the Practice Bend

A major, a minor, and a minor in musical theater are available in this department.
Combining respect for history with immersion in contemporary issues, and intellectual engagement 

with creative expression, the Department of Theater Studies offers students a variety of opportunities to study 
and practice theater. The faculty views theater as a form of human expression, shaped by social, economic, 
technological, personal, and artistic forces.

Courses are designed to give majors a broad background necessary for advanced professional or scholarly 
work and to offer nonmajors the opportunity to deepen their understanding and appreciation of the theater. 
Guiding the work of the faculty is the belief that the theater is a collaborative art form that reaches out to other 
disciplines.

Courses in acting, directing, design, technical theater, dramatic literature, theater history, and performance 
studies are complemented by productions of plays, past and present. This combination of academic coursework 
and production experience is a hallmark of the department’s approach. Its courses and productions are open to 
all undergraduates.

Courses in Theater Studies (THEATRST)
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
104. Let’s Dance! Live Art and Performance. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 165; also C-L: 
Music 165
115. The Theater Today. ALP Introduction to major areas of research in Theater Studies with focus 
on specific theoretical and creative issues of contemporary concern in various disciplines of theater study. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
145S. Acting. ALP, CCI The fundamentals of acting realism explored through exercises, scene study, and text 
analysis. Introduction to voice and movement training for the actor. Theory and text analysis studied in their 
historical context as well as their contemporary relevance. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190A. Duke Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Theater Studies. Topics differ by section. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
190FS. Focus Program Special Topics. Topics vary semester to semester. Open only to students in the 
Focus program. Instructor: Staff. One course.



Theater Studies (THEATRST) 795

190S-1. Special Topics in Reading Theater. A series of special topics seminars focusing on close readings 
of dramatic texts with an eye to their realization in performance. Each seminar will center on a theme and draw 
from a variety of theatrical works from different periods in history and/or different countries. Topics include 
drama and theater, drama and gender, drama and ethics, drama and history. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190S-2. Special Topics in Theater Studies. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
198FS. Performing Science: Experimentation, Collaboration, and Artistry. ALP, R, STS One 
course. C-L: see Science & Society 198FS; also C-L: Literature 198FS, English 198FS
202S. Introduction to Performance Studies. ALP, CCI, W Introduction to field of performance 
studies, with examples drawn from music, dance, theatre, performance art, protests, rituals, and everyday life. 
Through comparative study of global performance, we explore the usefulness of concepts of ritual, play, and 
performativity as they relate to performance and technology; intercultural performance and implications and 
ethics of appropriation and borrowing; originality and imitation; archive and repertoire; performative writing; 
and the performative dimensions of gender, race, and sexuality. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Literature 
202S, Cultural Anthropology 219S, Visual and Media Studies 205S, English 202S
204S. Performance and Social Change. ALP, EI One course. C-L: see Dance 207S; also C-L: International 
Comparative Studies 227S
209. Dramatic Forms of Musical Theatre. ALP This course studies the various narrative structures that 
have developed over the past 150 years to tell dramatic stories through music. Topics of discussion include 
the techniques of transforming songs into extended dramatic scenes (with an emphasis on the works of Kurt 
Weill, Rodgers & Hammerstein, Laurents & Sondheim); the relationship of the drama to revues, minstrel and 
burlesque shows, and melodrama; the development of the genre through integration, concept musicals, and 
popular opera; the process of adaptation required for other works to be musicalized; the relationship of musicals 
to comedy and plots of marriage; and the limits of musical storytelling. Instructor: Rogers. One course.
210S. American Musicals. ALP Study of American musicals, focusing on the period from Show Boat to 
Sondheim with attention to poetics, aesthetics, and politics. Topics include: the dramaturgical use of music and 
orchestration; the origins of musical theatre in burlesque, minstrelsy, and operetta; the centrality of gender, 
race, sexuality, and national identity to the genre; the relationship of stage to film; and the transformations of 
the genre by Rodgers & Hammerstein and Sondheim. There is no performance requirement, and students do 
not need to be able to sing or dance. Instructor: Rogers. One course. C-L: Music 243S
211. Musical Theater Workshop: Performance. ALP A workshop in honing the skills necessary to 
perform in a musical. Students required to present one cabaret of numbers from contemporary musicals and a 
workshop performance of a musical. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Music 
218, Dance 211
213A. The Arts in New York: A Thematic Approach. ALP, R, W One course. C-L: see English 312A; also 
C-L: Visual and Media Studies 259A, Public Policy 312A
214A. Internship in New York. One course. C-L: see English 313A; also C-L: Art History 312A, Visual and 
Media Studies 296A
214A-1. Internship in New York. C-L: see English 313A-1; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 296A-1, Art 
History 312A-1
215A. The Business of City Life. Half course. C-L: see English 314A
216S. Writing the Musical Book. ALP, W Study and create the dramatic text of musical theater, the ‘book’ 
that creates characters, structure, and narrative thrust. Course starts with grounding in the basics of text-writing 
by studying outstanding examples of bookwriting, from Arthur Laurents’ Gypsy to Brian Yorkey’s Pulitzer-
winning Next To Normal. Students write a series of short scenes (5-10 pages) to be read aloud and critiqued 
in class, with ultimate goal of completing an original or adapted book for a one-act musical (30-60 pages.) 
Instructor: Bell, Rogers. One course. C-L: English 228S, Music 220S
217SA. The Economics of Art (The Chicago Scene). ALP, CCI Introduction to Chicago and guests 
sharing experiences combining arts and entrepreneurship in theater, visual art, film, music, dance, marketing, 
and comedy. Discussion focuses on their careers and career paths, and relationships among facilities, budgets 



 Theater Studies (THEATRST)796

and missions. Site visits, guest speakers, and internships help assess history and changing mission of arts 
organizations, evolution of site and impact on creative work, identification of audience(s), response to current 
economic climate, and organization of staff as a reflection of priorities/values. Includes an internship in arts 
administration, marketing and development, or performance. Offered through Duke in Chicago Arts and 
Entrepreneurship summer program. Instructor: McAuliffe. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 221SA, 
Dance 279SA, Music 217SA, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 217SA, Markets and Management Studies
218SA. New York Scenes. ALP, R One course. C-L: see English 315SA; also C-L: Gender, Sexuality, and 
Feminist Studies 315SA, Art History 318SA, African & African American Studies 318SA, Jewish Studies 315SA
222. Shakespeare. ALP, EI, W One course. C-L: see English 235; also C-L: Medieval and Renaissance 
Studies 330
223S. Modern German Theater and Drama. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see German 335S; also C-L: 
International Comparative Studies
227. Drama of Greece and Rome. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 304; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 240
228. Ancient Myth. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Classical Studies 208; also C-L: Religion 208
232. Asian American Theatre. ALP, CCI Asian American theatre and performance traditions, including 
major dramatic texts and canon formation. Critical framework for discussing race, ethnicity, gender, and 
sexuality. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 387, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 182
233. Dance and Dance Theater of Asia. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 356; also C-L: Religion 
241, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 246, International Comparative Studies 243
235. Performance Art History and Theory. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI One course. C-L: see Art History 344; also 
C-L: Information Science + Studies 275, Literature 222, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 276
236. Gender in Dance and Theatre. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Dance 368; also C-L: Gender, 
Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 212, International Comparative Studies 215, Study of Sexualities
239A. Theater in London: Text. ALP Lecture version of Theater Studies 239AS/English 383A. Drama in 
performance from the Greeks to the present based on performances offered by the Royal Shakespeare Company, 
Royal National Theatre, and other theaters in London. Twenty plays will be seen and studied. (London Summer 
program.) Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 383A
239AS. Theater in London: Text. ALP, CCI Drama in performance from the Greeks to the present based 
on performances offered by the Royal Shakespeare Company, Royal National Theatre, and other theaters in 
London. Twenty plays will be seen and studied. Satisfies Area I, II, or III requirement for English majors, as 
determined by instructor. (London summer program.) Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 383AS
240A. Theater in London: Performance. ALP Lecture version of Theater Studies 240AS/English 384A. 
The stages of realization of a play or musical from the script to the production, focusing on productions in 
London. Aspects of theatrical performance through scene work, discussions, and workshops with British theater 
practitioners, observation of theater at work, and supervised projects. (London summer program.). One course. 
C-L: English 384A
240AS. Theater in London: Performance (DS4). ALP, CCI The stages of realization of a play or musical 
from the script to the production, focusing on productions in London. Aspects of theatrical performance through 
scene work, discussions, and workshops with British theater practitioners, observation of theater at work, and 
supervised projects. (London summer program.) Instructor: Beckwith. One course. C-L: English 384AS
241. Cabaret Workshop. ALP, CCI Creation of a cabaret performance (solos and ensemble work) borrowing 
elements drawn from comedy, drama, music, dance, as well as other contemporary performable art forms, using 
European Cabaret form at the turn of the twentieth century where social commentary, debate, questioning and 
provocation prevailed, as a model. Instructor: Hemphill. One course.
242S. The Art of Improvising. ALP We will explore techniques for spontaneous behavior, immediate 
creation, and developing your creativity and truth on stage. The goal of the class exercises will be to build 
community and collaboration, to deepen your communication skills, and to strengthen your natural sense of 



Theater Studies (THEATRST) 797

humor. We will study the works of Viola Spolin, Keith Johnstone, and iO. Instructor: McAuliffe. One course. 
C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 243S
243. Black Theater Workshop. ALP, CCI Explore race and culture in America through texts of Black 
playwrights. Scene study by racially diverse class to engender feedback process. Juxtaposition of playwright’s 
race to societal standards of universal content; relevance of actor’s race to playwright’s intent; historical context 
of Black Arts “militant” plays of the 1960s-70s. Workshop culminates in public performance. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: African & African American Studies 332
245. The Body in Art in Early Modern Europe: Power and Limits of Corporeal Representations. 
ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Art History 317; also C-L: Romance Studies 317, Dance 317, Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 217
246S. Shakespeare Studio. ALP Study in approaches to acting Shakespeare text which focus on the actor’s 
embodiment of text in ways which are organic, physical, and truthful. Use of text as the primary source for 
the actor’s work. Students will have opportunity to act in class exercises and projects. Extensive scenework. 
Prerequisite: Theater Studies 145S and consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
247. Alexander Technique for Musicians, Dancers, and Actors. ALP Half course. C-L: see Music 116; 
also C-L: Dance 116
248S. The Art of Public Speaking: The Natural Voice. ALP This course is open to undergraduate and 
graduate students at all levels of vocal exploration. It is for students who want to explore their own vocal habits 
and learn how each voice can be strengthened and sculpted. Whether for theater, public speaking, singing, or 
building confidence, this work addresses the unique possibilities of each individual voice. We will work with 
breathing exercises, text, tone, resonators, and movements. There will be assigned readings and presentations 
in class. Please note: it is up to the Director of Graduate Studies for a graduate student’s academic program to 
allow an undergraduate course to count for a master’s or doctoral degree. Instructor: Hemphill. One course. C-L: 
Marine Science and Conservation
249S. Understanding Mediation. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Literature 325S; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 316S, English 480S, Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 325S, Documentary Studies 358S
252FS. Performance and Citizenship in Asian America. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI The course examines 
the relationship between performance and citizenship with case studies drawn from Asian American history. 
Performance has been central to the formation and expression of citizenship since the beginning of US history, 
and for Asian Americans, who are stereotyped as “perpetual foreigners,” the experience of becoming citizens 
have involved complex legal and cultural challenges that question what “American” means broadly. Providing 
an interdisciplinary survey, the course includes studies of various forms of performances, including legal cases, 
activism, political campaigns, theater, film, and new media. Open only to Focus Program students. Instructor: 
Lee. One course.
255S. Directing. ALP Establishment of basic skills of information communication from script to stage to 
audience; analyzing texts from a director’s point of view; basic stage articulation of viewpoint; development of 
skills in mechanics and staging techniques. Emphasis on scripts of poetic realists. Prerequisite: Theater Studies 
145S and consent of instructor. Instructor: McAuliffe or Storer. One course.
261S. Costume Design. ALP, R The process of designing costumes for the stage beginning with the 
fundamentals of design and the language of clothing. Reading of plays as basis for analysis and interpretation of 
text and character, conceptualization of design ideas, and directions for design research. Weekly lab providing 
experience with and an understanding of costume construction theory and methodology, including the use of 
costume shop tools and equipment. Instructor: Bend. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 233S
262S. Scene Design. ALP, R Study of theory and methodology of set design for stage through examination 
of historical and contemporary stage design as well as conceptualization, research, and development of design 
solutions for assigned plays. Instructor: Bend. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 234S
263S. Lighting Design. ALP, R Introduction to the process and practice of lighting design for the theater. 
Focus on text analysis, research, design process, instrumentation, control, color, design documents, and 
realization of designs in the theater. Includes the study of principles and practices, labs in design imagery, and 
projects in lighting design. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 235S, Dance 276S



 Theater Studies (THEATRST)798

264S. Puppetry. ALP This course explores the conception and creation of various forms of puppetry. Students 
will investigate methods of building and performing puppets while looking into the strengths of different forms 
and styles. In addition students will be exposed to the incredible variety of contemporary world puppetry. 
Instructor: Bend. One course. C-L: Visual Arts 264S
272. American Dreams, American Movies. ALP One course. C-L: see English 288; also C-L: Visual and 
Media Studies 355
273S. Screenwriting. ALP, W Advanced writing projects for feature film. Study of existing scripts and 
videos, application of techniques. Instructor: Bell. One course. C-L: English 317S, Visual and Media Studies 387S
275S. Acting For the Camera. ALP Introduction to film and television acting. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 335S
276. Italian Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 380; also C-L: Literature 215, Visual and Media 
Studies 308
277. The Dramatic Monster: Horror on Stage and Screen. ALP The evolving image of the “monster” 
on stage and screen, from the Victorian melodrama Sweeny Todd to the psychological-horror shocker Audition. 
Students will give oral reports (with appropriate clips) on horror movies past and present, beginning with the 
classic silent Cabinet of Dr. Caligari. Focus on how anxieties of different eras give rise to the different nightmares 
that play themselves out in the darkness of our theaters. Instructor: Bell. One course. C-L: English 274
278. Introduction to Film Studies. ALP One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 289; also C-L: 
English 181, Literature 110, Documentary Studies 264, Policy Journalism and Media
279S. Performing Sexual Health: The Duke Sex Ed Squad. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Dance 215S; 
also C-L: Global Health 216S
280S. Dramatic Writing. ALP, W Fundamentals of writing for stage. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: 
English 226S 
282S. Writing Movies and Plays: Adaptation. ALP, W Theory and practice of the process of adaptation 
of serious literary works of fiction to screenplay or play form. Reading and analysis of literary works adapted as 
screenplays and plays. Project in writing an adaptation. Instructor: McAuliffe. One course. C-L: English 227S, 
Visual and Media Studies 321S
282SA. Transforming Fiction for Stage and Screen. ALP, W Theory and practice of the process of 
adaptation of serious literary works of fiction to screenplay or play form. Reading and analysis of literary works 
adapted as screenplays and plays. Project in writing an adaptation. Taught in Duke-In-New York Program. 
Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: English 272SA
283S. Writing about Performance. ALP, CCI, R, W One course. C-L: see Writing 305S; also C-L: Dance 
302S, Music 305S
285S. Ready for Prime Time: Writing the Dramatic TV Episode. ALP, W Some of the best dramatic 
writing today can now be found on television. This class will focus on one commercial prime-time drama, past 
or present. Beginning with a deep immersion into the world of that show—watching all of Season One—students 
break into groups, coming up with their own long stories to advance the plots. Each student will pitch a story 
for their particular version of “Season Two”—developing an outline, tracking their storylines with the other 
members of their group, and finally writing a draft of an hour-long TV episode. Each student will write his or her 
own script—but will need to share notes, thoughts and feedback with their fellow writers. Instructor: Bell. One 
course. C-L: English 224S, Visual and Media Studies 220S
290-1. Special Topics in Dramatic Literature. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290-2. Special Topics in Acting. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290-3. Special Topics in Acting. Topics vary each semester. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
290-4. Special Topics in Theater Studies Workshop. Research, study, and exploration of a selected 
dramatic text or texts, other performance material, and/or particular aspects of performance (historical, 
cultural, textual, or stylistic). Emphasis on the process of investigating a text—both in theory and in practice. 
Culminates in performance or presentation. May be repeated for credit. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.



Theater Studies (THEATRST) 799

290-5. Special Topics in Mainstage Production. Students participate in the production of a theatrical 
text for public performance. Students analyze, research, rehearse, and produce a play under the direction of a 
member of the Theater Studies faculty or a guest professional. Students may focus on acting, directing, design, 
dramaturgy, management, or production; specific area of focus will be determined through audition and/or 
arrangement with the instructor. Consent of instructor required. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
290-6. Special Topics in Film. Topics vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-1. Special Topics in Dramatic Literature, History, Theory, or Criticism. May be repeated for 
credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-2. Special Topics in Acting. May be repeated for credit. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
290S-4. Special Topics in Theater Studies. Topics vary. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.
290S-5. Special Topics in Arts Management. Topics in aspects of arts management. May be repeated for 
credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290S-6. Special Topics in Film. Topics Vary. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Independent Study. ALP Individual directed study in a field of special interest on a previously approved 
topic, under the supervision of a faculty member, resulting in an academic or artistic product. Consent of 
instructor and the director of undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
304. Thinking through the Body: Becoming an Ordinary Genius. ALP Half course. C-L: see Dance 
314; also C-L: Music 314
309S. Dancing States of Mind: The Self, Social and Political Practice of Dance. ALP, R One course. 
C-L: see Dance 309S; also C-L: Cultural Anthropology 311S, International Comparative Studies 309S
310S. Non-Profit Cultural Institutions. EI, SS Non-profit cultural institutions are an integral part of arts 
communities at all levels: national, regional, local. Through readings, projects and service-learning, students 
gain overview of non-profit cultural organization formation, management, operational structures, governance 
challenges, board member responsibilities and situational ethics. Explores historical and present functions 
and social structures in which nonprofit tax-exempt organizations operate. Investigates how nonprofit cultural 
institutions have increasingly become a vehicle for fostering creativity in the arts and humanities. Students 
partner with local non-profit arts/cultural organizations to work on specific projects. Instructor: Ellison. One 
course. C-L: Economics 247S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 310S, Visual and Media Studies 329S, Public 
Policy 318S, Dance 208S
311S. Legal Issues for the Performing Arts. EI, SS An overview of copyright, contract, discrimination, 
employment, obscenity and other laws relevant to performing arts through readings and discussion of case 
law, statutes, sample legal documents, news reports and other materials. Includes exposure to legal issues for 
non-profit boards. Cuts across these legal issues to examine creative works themselves and their interplay with 
the body of laws. Views legal system in a broader context that examines how our legal system is a useful tool in 
promoting creation of artistic works. Instructor: Ellison. One course. C-L: Public Policy 363S, Economics 223S, 
Dance 379S, Innovation and Entrepreneurship 311S
312S. Arts Entrepreneurship. One course. C-L: see Music 295S; also C-L: Innovation and Entrepreneurship 
295S, Dance 201S, Visual and Media Studies 295S, Documentary Studies 295S, Visual Arts 295S
316SA. stARTup Project. ALP, R This project-based class challenges teams of writers, actors, dancers, 
visual/media artists, musicians, and managers to come together to devise, workshop, and produce an arts-
based event. Students will master the elevator pitch, develop fundraising and publicity/marketing strategies, 
conduct production meetings, manage a budget, and present the work at the end of the term. Students will 
study what strategies have led to success for startup arts companies in Chicago. We will make site visits to arts 
companies. Open only to students in Duke In Chicago Arts & Entrepreneurship summer program. Instructor: 
McAuliffe. One course. C-L: Visual and Media Studies 315SA, Dance 307SA, Music 316SA, Innovation and 
Entrepreneurship 316SA, Markets and Management Studies



 Theater Studies (THEATRST)800

317. Professional Internship. Supervised work on a professional production; focus may be on acting, design, 
playwriting, theater administration, or stage management. Written analysis of both the process of producing as 
well as the final production. Consent of instructor required. Offered only on Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory basis. 
Half course. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
318. Professional Internship. Same as 317, but for work that extends over a full term. Consent of instructor 
required. Offered only on Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory basis. Instructor: Staff. One course.
320S. Movement in Question: Introduction to Critical Dance Studies. ALP, CCI, CZ, R, W One 
course. C-L: see Dance 318S; also C-L: Visual Arts 317S
322S. Chekhov. ALP, CCI, W One course. C-L: see Russian 327S; also C-L: International Comparative 
Studies
323. The Actress: Celebrity and the Woman. ALP, CCI, CZ One course. C-L: see Russian 383; also C-L: 
Gender, Sexuality, and Feminist Studies 260, International Comparative Studies 383
334S. Modern Drama 1880-1940. ALP, CCI, CZ, W In this course, we analyze key texts from the history 
of modern dramatic literature starting in the late nineteenth century and proceeding to 1940. Starting with 
the flourishing of realism and naturalism in Scandinavia, we trace the rapid evolution of dramatic forms that 
characterized playwriting in Europe, England, and the United States. We will analyze not only the scripts but 
also various productions of each of these significant plays by significant playwrights, ranging from Henrik Ibsen 
and August Strindberg to Gertrude Stein and Bertolt Brecht. Instructor: Gobert. One course.
335S. Modern Drama: 1940-2000. ALP, CCI, W In this course, we analyze key texts from the history of 
modern dramatic literature starting in 1940 and proceeding to the end of the twentieth century. Starting with 
the “non-Aristotelian” drama of Bertolt Brecht, we trace the rapid evolution of dramatic forms that characterized 
playwriting in Europe, England, and then the United States. We will analyze not only the scripts but also various 
productions of each of these significant plays by significant playwrights, ranging from Bertolt Brecht and Samuel 
Beckett to Tony Kushner and Sarah Kane. Instructor: Gobert. One course. C-L: English 365S
336. Shakespeare through 1600. ALP, EI, R One course. C-L: see English 336; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 331
337. Shakespeare After 1600. ALP, EI, R One course. C-L: see English 337; also C-L: Medieval and 
Renaissance Studies 332
338S. Globalization and Theater. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI This course surveys the various ways in which 
contemporary theatre has been created and circulated in a global context. Instructor: Lee. One course. C-L: 
International Comparative Studies 357S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 338S
340S. Solo Performance. ALP, W The makings of solo performance. Creation of personal presentation 
through journal writing, memory exploration, and personal interests. Exploration of text through voice work, 
storytelling, and choreography of the solo performer through movement, gesture, and props. Previous theater or 
dance experience plus instructor consent required. Instructor: Hemphill. One course. C-L: Dance 206S
345S. Advanced Acting: Contemporary Texts. ALP Scene study based on reading, analysis, and research. 
Examination and development of performance/critical choices. Prerequisite: Theater Studies 145S and consent 
of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
346S. Voice and Body Gesture Theater. ALP Exercises designed for breath control, ear training and 
the spoken word, with emphasis on the theatrical use of the voice in gestural theater, in order to strengthen, 
free, and develop the natural range of the voice with the support of the body. Individual and ensemble work. 
Instructor: Hemphill. One course.
349L. Mainstage Run Crew. This course will instruct students on how to run a show. Course will cover 
lighting, sound and backstage basics culminating in students running the department’s mainstage production. 
Instructor: Bend. Half course.
350. Mainstage Production. ALP, CCI, R Students participate in the production of a theatrical text 
for public performance. Students analyze, research, rehearse, and produce a play under the direction of a 
member of the Theater Studies faculty or a guest professional. Students may focus on acting, directing, design, 
dramaturgy, management, or production; specific area of focus will be determined through audition and/or 



Theater Studies (THEATRST) 801

arrangement with the instructor. Consent of instructor required. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
351S. Directing Chekhov. ALP, CCI, EI Seminar in directing with emphasis on directing actors, 
demonstration and laboratory exercises, text analysis, and rehearsal techniques. Examination of rehearsal 
working methods, development of performance choices,exploration of material and process with emphasis 
on the plays of Chekhov. Explores visual and conceptual material of directing, and problems of working 
in performance. Includes a video project—students videotape their directing work and accomplish post-
production—edit and production of a digital video file. Projects evaluated on basis of composition, visual 
interest, and narrative force. Pre-req: THEATRST 145S and consent of instructor. Instructor: McAuliffe. One 
course. C-L: Russian 351S
364. Performance and Technology: Composition Workshop. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Dance 
308; also C-L: Information Science + Studies 376, Electrical and Computer Engineering 364
370S. Moving Image Practice. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Visual and Media Studies 261S; also C-L: 
Information Science + Studies
371. Artists in Healthcare: Collaborations and Complexities. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, R One course. C-L: 
see Dance 371; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 374, Music 371
372. Existentialist Cinema. ALP, CCI, CZ, EI, STS One course. C-L: see German 386; also C-L: Literature 
218, Visual and Media Studies 283
373S. American Independent Cinema. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Literature 318S; also C-L: English 
389S, Visual and Media Studies 332S, Documentary Studies 322S
375. Mafia at the Movies. ALP, CCI One course. C-L: see Italian 385; also C-L: Literature 385, Visual and 
Media Studies 385
380S. Playmaking: Collaboration from Page to Stage. ALP, W Dramatic writing—for stage, screen or 
film—is not meant to be read, like a novel or poem—it’s meant to be performed. In this class, students explore 
the ‘liveness’ of dramatic writing by performing: not just as writers, but also as actors and directors, working 
with material generated in class and getting it up on its feet. Starting with writing exercises that aim at the core 
concept of ‘dramatic action’, students progress to self-generated works. During the semester each student will 
get to experiment with writing, directing and acting. Semester ends with public presentation of the work that’s 
been written and brought to life on stage by the class. Instructor: Bell, Storer. One course. C-L: English 316S
390A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Advanced Special Topics in Theater Studies. Topics 
differ by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-1. Special Topics in Directing. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-2. Special Topics in Dramatic Writing. May be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-3. Special Topics in Design. Topics in aspects of theatrical design. Topics vary each semester offered, 
may be repeated for credit. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S-4. Special Topics in Performance Studies. Topics vary by semester. May be repeated for credit. 
Topics course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401S. Senior Colloquium. ALP, R Major research project in production (acting, directing), critical writing, 
dramatic writing, or design. Reserved for senior Theater Studies majors. Instructor: Staff. One course.
421S. Laughing Through It All: French Comedy and Its Social/Political Contexts, Middle Ages to 
the 21st C. ALP, CCI, CZ, FL One course. C-L: see French 412S
492T. Tutorial. Tutorial under the supervision of a faculty member for two or more students working on 
related independent projects. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-1. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate 
studies required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Senior Distinction Project. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Theater Studies (THEATRST)802

520A. Theater in London: Text. A survey of drama from the Elizabethan period to the present based on 
performances offered by the Royal Shakespeare Company, Royal National Theatre, and other theaters in London 
and Stratford-Upon-Avon. Twenty plays will be seen and studied. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course. C-L: English 583
521S. Moliere: The Phenomenon of Laughter. ALP, CCI, FL One course. C-L: see French 525S; also C-L: 
Medieval and Renaissance Studies 601S
530S. Translation Studies and Workshop. ALP, CCI, CZ, W Through reading texts about translation 
and by doing an independent project translating part of a play, students develop skills in translation theory 
and practice, culminating in a public staged reading of their work. Each student chooses a different play, in 
source language of his/her own choice, and translates into English. Readings are seminal texts in translation 
studies covering topics such as globalization, adaptation, the translator’s role, gender in translation, and 
postcolonialism to explore transmission of text/performance across cultures. Course is for graduate students 
and undergraduates. Enrollment limited. No previous translation experience required. Instructor: Conceison. 
One course. C-L: Romance Studies 520S, Asian & Middle Eastern Studies 502S
533S. Performance Studies. ALP Introduction to theatrical transformations of traditional notions of drama 
into the broader category of performance, and to the performative field that seeks to understand them. Topics 
include the crossing of formal boundaries, the development of new technical possibilities, the role of uncertainty 
in the process of making a performance, and the purposes of performance, which range from the social to the 
spiritual and from the political to the personal. Theoretical readings and performances including works by 
Wagner, Artaud, Brecht, Benjamin, Chaplin, O’Neill, Stanislavski, Barthes, and Anderson. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Literature 520S
535S. AfroFuturism. ALP One course. C-L: see African & African American Studies 620S; also C-L: Dance 
535S, Visual and Media Studies 524S
540A. Theater in London: Performance. Understanding the growth of a play from the script to final 
production, with focus on shows playing in London. Includes backstage theater tours, scene work, observations, 
audition workshops with theater practitioners, and supervised projects. Instructor consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course. C-L: English 584
590. Advanced Special Topics in Dramatic Literature (Lecture). Topics vary by semester. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590S-1. Advanced Special Topics in Dramatic Literature (Seminar). Instructor: Staff. One course.
620S. Film-philosophers/Film-makers. ALP, CZ, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 620S; also C-L: 
Visual and Media Studies 622S, English 620S, Documentary Studies 620S
671S. Thinking Digital Cinema. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Literature 614S; also C-L: Visual and Media 
Studies 614S
691. Independent Study. Individual directed study on advanced graduate level under supervision of a faculty 
member resulting in an academic or artistic product. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course.

The Major
The major in theater studies offers students instruction in both 1) the relationship of theater to the cultures 

that produce and consume it through the study of dramatic literature, theater history, and performance studies; 
and 2) the collaborative theater arts (writing, acting, design, directing, production), with a particular interest in 
the ways in which these two areas inform each other. While the theater studies major offers students preparation 
for graduate study, advanced theater training, or entry-level work in theater and related professions, it also offers 
a basic understanding and appreciation of the literature, history, and practice of theater for a student who desires 
a liberal arts education.

Major Requirements
• Theater Studies 115 (Theater Today)
• Theater Studies 145S (Acting)



Theater Studies (THEATRST) 803

• One 200-level or above dramatic writing class
• One 200-level or above dramatic literature class (may be 239AS Theater in London: Text)
• One 200-level or above performance studies class
• One 200-level or above theatrical design class
• Theater Studies 255S (Directing)
• Theater Studies 401S (Senior Colloquium)
• Two additional 100-level or above courses in theater studies

Departmental Graduation with Distinction
Students with at least a 3.5 average in their theater studies courses are eligible to apply for a project. Students 

must complete eleven courses in total to graduate with distinction in the major instead of the standard ten. All 
distinction courses count toward the major. Interested students should acquire the full policy for Graduation with 
Distinction in theater studies and an application form from the theater studies office. The student’s proposed 
project needs the approval of the project supervisor and the director of undergraduate studies. All projects must 
be approved by March of the student’s junior year. 

A student may pursue a project in writing, directing, design, acting, dramatic literature, theater history, or 
performance studies. All projects must have a research and a substantial written component. They may also have 
a production component. Students are required to take either a research independent study or a home seminar in 
the fall and the Senior Colloquium in the spring.

The student’s written work and production project will be reviewed by a committee (approved by the 
director of undergraduate studies) composed of the project supervisor, the director of undergraduate studies, 
and a third faculty member in theater studies or a related field. A meeting of the committee and the student to 
evaluate the project will be part of the evaluation process. The committee will decide whether the student receives 
distinction and what level of distinction the student will receive. See the Policy for Graduation with Distinction in 
theater studies for specific prerequisites.

The Minor in Theater Studies
• Theater Studies 115 (Theater Today)
• Four additional 100-level or above courses in theater studies

The Minor in Musical Theater
The musical theater minor is offered to students interested in developing artistic and critical skills in the 

field of musical theater. Courses are offered that focus on performing, writing, and directing musical theater—as 
well as on the history and theory of the genre. A total of five courses are required for the minor, and students must 
earn grades of C- or above in all courses that count for the minor.

• Theater Studies 209 (Dramatic Forms of Musical Theater)
• Theater Studies 210 (American Musicals)
• Two required courses in practice, which may be chosen from the following courses:

• Theater Studies 211 (Musical Theater Workshop: Performance) 
• Theater Studies 212 (Musical Theater Workshop: Creation) 
• Theater Studies 241 (Cabaret Workshop) 
• Theater Studies 248 (Voice and Speech) 
• Theater Studies 255S (Directing)
• Theater Studies 346 (Voice and Body Gesture Theater)

And one additional course, which may be an additional course in practice or an academic seminar on a topic 
related to musical theater.

Visual Studies
For courses in visual studies, see Art, Art History & Visual Studies on page 123. 



 Thompson Writing Program (WRITING)804

Writing
Associate Professor Woods, Director; Associate Professor of the Practice Comer, Director of First-Year Writ-
ing; Assistant Professor of the Practice Ahern-Dodson, Director of Outreach; Associate Professor of the Practice 
Moskovitz, Director of Writing-in-the-Disciplines; Assistant Professor of the Practice Rego, Director of Faculty 
Development and Assessment; Assistant Professor of the Practice Schonberg, Director of the Writing Studio; 
Lecturers Corey, Klein, and Mullenneaux; Lecturing Fellows Andres, Ansley, Baletti, Bocci, Byerly, Caputo, Can-
telli, Casey, Carr, Chinn, Dimpfl, Holtzman, Kalman-Lamb, LeJacq, Ossi-Lupo, Parks, Quirici, Rose, J. Smith, L. 
Smith, Sotelo-Miller, Thananopavarn, Wang, Welji, Welsh, Welte, Wetsel, and Whitt; Instructor B Swezey

The Thompson Writing Program has three components: (1) the First-Year Writing Program (Writing 
101), (2) the Writing-in-the-Disciplines Program, and (3) the Writing Studio, a writing consulting service for 
undergraduates.

All undergraduates are required to complete Writing 101 (Academic Writing) in the fall or spring of their 
first year at Duke. They are also required to take two writing-designated courses in the disciplines. The Thompson 
Writing Program reviews these Writing-in-the-Disciplines courses and provides support for the faculty teaching 
them. The Writing Studio offers free consulting to students working on writing for any course they are taking at 
Duke.

The various sections of Writing 101 are taught by an interdisciplinary faculty and focus on issues in the 
sciences, social sciences, or arts and humanities. While specific readings and writing assignments vary with the 
instructor, the aim of all sections is to introduce students to the practices of critical reading and writing that 
characterize university study.

Courses in the Thompson Writing Program (WRITING)
65. Writing Transfer across Contexts. This course focuses on writing transfer. Students will engage with 
transfer by transferring a written, verbal, and/or audio project of their choosing from one context and format 
to a different context and format. Course theoretical concepts include writing transfer; rhetorical context; text 
format and design; genre; and disciplinary and writing-occasion conventions and expectations. These include 
global-level issues (design, audience, evidence, epistemology, organization, structure, argument, etc.) and 
sentence-level issues (paragraphs, clarity, powerful prose, etc.). Students will discuss drafts-in-progress, create 
interim project phases, and engage in intensive peer feedback. Instructor: Staff. Quarter course.
70. Introduction to Critical Reading and Writing. Designed for students who seek more time and 
practice in reading and academic writing skills in order to meet the rigorous intellectual demands of Writing 101. 
Topics include reading comprehension; recognizing key ideas; creating theses; conducting research; structuring 
arguments; eliminating errors in grammar, mechanics, and diction; citing sources; and avoiding plagiarism. 
Recitation component includes small-group workshops and one-on-one tutoring. Writing 70 does not satisfy 
either the Writing 101 or the WID requirements. Permission of Director of First-Year Writing required. 
Instructor: Staff. Half course.
89S. First-Year Seminar: Special Topics. First-Year Seminar in a topic involving an area of writing 
studies, such as health narratives, writing performance, science writing, etc. Topics vary each semester offered. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
101. Academic Writing. Instruction in the complexities of producing sophisticated academic argument, with 
attention to critical analysis and rhetorical practices. Topics vary by section. Instructor: Staff. One course.
165S. Making Your Voice Heard: The Arts of Oral Communication, Critical Speaking, and Digital 
Rhetoric. ALP, EI From ancient storytelling and Aristotelian rhetoric to contemporary Ted talks and Vox 
Pop podcasts, oral communication remains one of the most varied, meaningful, and influential arts of human 
expression. This course introduces students to the complex traditions, legacies, and emerging landscapes for 
oral communication, critical speaking, and digital rhetoric in academic, professional, public, and social contexts. 
Of central importance will be a focus on the ethics and socio-cultural structures that shape oral communication 
and that impact whose voices tend to be heard and whose voices often remain less heard. Instructor: Comer. 
One course.
182. Public Speaking: Policy Advocacy and Communication. W Theoretical and practical 
understanding of the elements of effective advocacy, especially as applied to policy issues. Focus on oral 
communication (both formal public speaking and interactive exchange), written exposition, and presentation 
skills. Emphasis on the human dimensions of the communication process-voice and body behavior, audience 



Thompson Writing Program (WRITING) 805

evaluation, focus, control and self-awareness. Identifies techniques for minimizing communication distraction, 
developing confidence in presentation situations, and analyzing informational requirements. Does not apply 
toward public policy studies major. Instructor: Byerly. One course. C-L: Public Policy 182
190S. Special Topics: Writing in the Disciplines. Topics vary by section. Topics course. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
190SA. Special Topics: Writing in the Disciplines. Topics vary by section. Topics course. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
205S. Composing Oneself: Stress, Identity, and Wellness. ALP, EI, SS, W Interdisciplinary 
exploration of arts and science related to stress, identity, and wellness. Multi-dimensional focus fusing science, 
theory, art, literature, and performance to understand structural causes of stress, their physiological effects, 
and how stressors impact our identities and community ethics. Through text analysis and experience, students 
explore how arts of wellness, including yoga, mindfulness, and art therapies, impact stress, identity, and ethics. 
Course texts include literary and discourse theory, social science, neuroscience, and primary texts related to 
stress, identity, and wellness, including nonfiction, fiction, poetry, art, music, performance. Instructor: Comer 
and Ferney. One course. C-L: Arts & Sciences IDEAS themes and University Course 205S, Study of Ethics 205S
255S. Literacy, Writing, Tutoring. SS, W Theories of literacy and high school and college level teaching 
tutoring practices. Composition studies, literacy studies, and writing center/tutoring theories. Includes tutoring 
students. Instructor: Schonberg. One course. C-L: Education 255S
259S. Student Activism, Storytelling, and Community Change. ALP, EI, W One course. C-L: see 
Education 259S; also C-L: Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 259S, Human Rights
270. Composing the Internship Experience: Digital Rhetoric and Social Media Discourse. 
ALP, W Examines how students currently participating in an internship or other work-related experience 
can productively narrate their experiences using digital rhetoric and social media. Topics include theoretical 
perspectives on social media, examining audience, purpose, and context in digital platforms, and composing in 
public sphere. Students apply internship/work experience to course concepts as they produce digital writing and 
social media projects. Online course. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
271. Reflective Writing and the Internship/Work Experience. Study of key concepts related to 
reflective writing through reading, discussion, and structured writing. Students will compose reflective writing 
about their internship/work experiences. Prerequisite: Writing 270. Instructor: Comer. Half course.
280S. Ethics of Ethnography: In the Field and on the Page. EI, R, SS, W Inquiry into the practical 
and ethical considerations of ethnography as both a research method and a writing genre. Students learn to 
identify rhetorical strategies of ethnographic texts and interrogate the moral, political, and ethical issues in 
representing the ‘other.’ Frequent workshops guide students through individual research on the intersection of 
‘race’ and some aspect of Durham’s social or historical context. Students develop observation and interviewing 
skills, conduct fieldwork in Durham, and work through several drafts of their own ethnographies, while learning 
to give and receive feedback. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Open only to DukeImmerse students. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Rego. One course. C-L: Cultural Anthropology 280S
293. Research Independent Study. R, W Individual investigation, reading, and writing under the 
supervision of a faculty member leading to a substantial written document. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Consent of 
instructor and Director of the Thompson Writing Program required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
305S. Writing about Performance. ALP, CCI, R, W Inquiry into the concept of “performance” broadly 
construed--not only as it refers to “staged” concerts or plays, but also as social ritual and as self-presentation, 
appropriately situated in cultural context. Writing experiments aimed at capturing the ephemeral nature of 
live performance, with attention to how meaning is enacted through movement, sound, lighting, rhythm, voice, 
emotion, and audience interaction. Regular writer’s workshops and field trips to theater, dance, and musical 
performances. Students compose critical reviews and a research project on a performance genre, an artist’s 
approach, or other related topic of their choosing. Prerequisite: Writing 101. Instructor: Rego. One course. C-L: 
Dance 302S, Theater Studies 283S, Music 305S
591. Independent Study. Directed study in a field of special interest in Writing Studies on an approved 
topic under the direction of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive written product. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Biochemistry (BIOCHEM)806

Medicine (School)—Graduate (School)  
Basic Science Courses Open to 
Undergraduates

Qualified students in arts and sciences may select courses from the following offered by the graduate 
departments associated with the School of Medicine. 

A major is not offered to undergraduates in any of the departments listed below. 
For permission to register for these courses and for further information, see the contacts listed with each 

department.

Biochemistry
Meta Kuehn, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Biochemistry (BIOCHEM)
301. Introductory Biochemistry I: Intermediary Metabolism. Chemistry of the constituents of proteins, 
lipids, carbohydrates, and nucleic acids and their metabolic interrelationships. Prerequisite: two semesters of 
organic chemistry. Instructors: Coggins and Staff. One course.
302. Introductory Biochemistry II. Structure, function, and biosynthesis of biological macromolecules 
and regulation of their synthesis. Intermediary metabolism and metabolic utilization of energy. Biochemistry 
of biological membranes, receptors, and signal transduction via membrane receptors. Prerequisite: organic 
chemistry and Biochemistry 301. Instructors: Greenleaf and staff. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Open to first-year students and 
sophomores with consent of supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
401. Applied Biochemistry. NS Utilizes knowledge gained from Introduction to Biochemistry to become 
more comfortable with its application. Augments current biochemical knowledge by delving into disease 
mechanisms, media-hyped health crazes, and assessing clinical trials. At conclusion of this class, you should be 
able to critically assess biochemical statements and validity in all mediums, whether in a class or presented by 
the media. Prerequisite: Intro to Biochemistry I (Summer or Fall semester) or related biology/chemistry classes 
with permission of instructor. Instructor: Hamilton. One course.
536. Bioorganic Chemistry. One course. C-L: see Chemistry 536
593. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest, under the 
supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive paper or written report containing 
significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Designed for students interested in either 
a laboratory or a library project in biochemistry. One course for undergraduate students. One to twelve units for 
graduate students. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
622. Structure of Biological Macromolecules. R Computer graphics intensive study of some of the 
biological macromolecules whose three-dimensional structures have been determined at high resolution. 
Emphasis on the patterns and determinants of protein structure. Two-hour discussion session each week along 
with computer-based lessons and projects. Instructors: D. Richardson and J. Richardson. One course. C-L: 
Structural Biology and Biophysics 622, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 622
631. Contemporary Topics in Membrane Biology. This course will highlight modern topics regarding 
biological membranes and membrane proteins that are important for human physiology and disease. Topics 
include structure and dynamics of biological membranes, structure and function of membrane proteins that play 
critical roles in cell signaling, diseases related to dysfunction of membrane and membrane proteins, and current 
efforts on drug discovery. Major techniques used in membrane research will also be covered. The format will be 
a combination of lectures and discussion of primary literature. Students will be evaluated based on their class 
participation and performance at the final presentations. Reserved for graduate students; open to undergraduate 



Biochemistry (BIOCHEM) 807

students by instructor permission. Instructor: Lee, Bennett, Kuehn, Rajagopal, and Yang. Half course. C-L: Cell 
and Molecular Biology 631, Neurobiology 631, Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 631
658. Structural Biochemistry I. Principles of modern structural biology. Protein-nucleic acid recognition, 
enzymatic reactions, viruses, immunoglobulins, signal transduction, and structure-based drug design 
described in terms of the atomic properties of biological macromolecules. Discussion of methods of structure 
determination with particular emphasis on macromolecular X-ray crystallography NMR methods, homology 
modeling, and bioinformatics. Students use molecular graphics tutorials and Internet databases to view and 
analyze structures. Prerequisites: organic chemistry and introductory biochemistry. Instructors: Beese and 
staff. Half course. C-L: Cell and Molecular Biology 658, Cell Biology 658, University Program in Genetics 658, 
Structural Biology and Biophysics 658, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 658
659. Structural Biochemistry II. Continuation of Biochemistry 658. Structure/function analysis of proteins 
as enzymes, multiple ligand binding, protein folding and stability, allostery, protein-protein interactions. 
Prerequisites: Biochemistry 658, organic chemistry, physical chemistry, and introductory biochemistry. 
Instructors: Zhou and staff. Half course. C-L: Cell Biology 659, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 659, 
Structural Biology and Biophysics 659, University Program in Genetics 659
667. Molecular Aspects of DNA Biology. Addresses molecular aspects of DNA replication, repair, 
recombination, and chromosome segregation. Disease states linked to aberrations in these processes will also 
be considered. The course format includes background lectures by participating faculty coupled with student-
led presentation and discussion of faculty-selected papers from the primary literature. Student evaluation is 
based on in-class presentation and participation in the related discussion. Prerequisites: undergraduate courses 
in biochemistry and molecular biology (or genetics). Mini-course, 1st half-semester. Instructor: Modrich, 
MacAlpine, Schumacher. Half course.
668. RNA Biology: Co-Transcriptional and Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene 
Expression. Explores various aspects of RNA biology and function. Topics will include splicing, translation, 
RNA: Protein interactions, non-coding RNAs, RNA modifications, viral RNA regulation, RNA structure-function 
relationships, and RNA-targeted drug discovery. Students will also learn about the major techniques used in 
RNA research, including in vitro and in vivo methods for understanding global RNA regulation. The format will 
be a combination of weekly lectures which will also include discussion of primary literature. Students will be 
evaluated based on their participation and performance during in-class presentations. Students will also write 
a short mock research grant on a topic of their choosing. Instructor: Meyer. One course. C-L: Cell Biology 668, 
University Program in Genetics 668
681. Biophysical Methods. A survey of the theory and application of biological techniques based on physical 
principles. The course goal is to introduce these methods so that students can understand their application 
in the primary literature. Methods covered include: Optical Spectroscopy, Fluorescence, Binding, Light 
Microscopy, Electron Microscopy, Hydrodynamics, Kinetic Methods, Electrophysiology, Magnetic Resonance 
and Mass Spectrometry. Lectures on each method are presented by an expert in that area. Instructor: Oas. One 
course. C-L: Structural Biology and Biophysics 681
690. Advanced Topics in Biochemistry. Topics and instructors announced each semester. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
695. Understanding NMR Spectroscopy. Course aimed at graduate students who have some familiarity 
with high-resolution NMR who wish to deepen their understanding of how NMR experiments actually ‘work’. 
Introduces quantum mechanical tools needed to understand pulse sequences, with emphasis on obtaining good 
understanding of how experiments actually work. Course also covers advanced biomolecular NMR experiments 
that enable structural and dynamic characterization of biomolecules. For roughly half of course, students will be 
expected to follow online lectures that accompany course textbook, with class meetings emphasizing concepts, 
group discussion, and problem solving. Prerequisites: undergraduate physical chemistry, undergraduate 
biochemistry, and one year of calculus. Instructor: Al-Hashimi. One course.
696. Macromolecular Structure Determination by X-Ray Crystallography: Principles and 
Practice. Theoretical and practical principles of macromolecular X-ray crystallography. Topics covered include 
crystal symmetry, space group theory and determination, diffraction theory, a practical understanding of 
crystallization, X-ray intensity data collection and data processing, phase determination, refinement and model 
validation. Prerequisites: Undergraduate physical chemistry; undergraduate biochemistry; at least one year of 
calculus. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Schumacher. One course.



 Cell Biology (CELLBIO)808

Cell Biology
Michel Bagnat, Director of Graduate Studies
Sharyn Endow, Director of Undergraduate Studies

Courses in Cell Biology (CELLBIO)
451. Introductory Human Physiology. Focus on human organ-system physiology; cellular physiology; 
basic concepts and principles underlying the physiologic function of each organ system and their integration 
to maintain homeostasis; application of physiologic principles to interpret clinical aspects of failure of these 
systems; organ systems include: nervous, musculoskeletal, cardiovascular, respiratory, gastrointestinal, urinary, 
endocrine, and reproductive. Online course. Instructors: Carbrey and Jakoi. One course.
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a field of special interest under the supervision 
of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Marine Sciences
658. Structural Biochemistry I. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 658; also C-L: Cell and Molecular 
Biology 658, University Program in Genetics 658, Structural Biology and Biophysics 658, Computational Biology 
and Bioinformatics 658
659. Structural Biochemistry II. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 659; also C-L: Computational Biology 
and Bioinformatics 659, Structural Biology and Biophysics 659, University Program in Genetics 659
668. RNA Biology: Co-Transcriptional and Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression. One 
course. C-L: see Biochemistry 668; also C-L: University Program in Genetics 668

Cell and Molecular Biology
Cagla Eroglu, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Cell and Molecular Biology (CMB)
631. Contemporary Topics in Membrane Biology. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 631; also C-L: 
Neurobiology 631, Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 631
640. Quantitative Approaches to Biological Problems: From Cartoon Models to System 
Behavior. This class is aimed at biologists who want to gain an appreciation of how mathematical approaches 
can supplement experimental approaches. We will teach you how to convert cartoon diagrams to differential 
equations, and re-familiarize you with some basic concepts from math and physics that help us develop a better 
intuition of how the world works. Then we will discuss how quantitative approaches can yield insights into 
how control systems behave. The class will use calculus at an elementary level and an occasional computer 
simulation, but we will focus more on concepts and applications. Instructor: Lew. One course. C-L: University 
Program in Genetics 640
658. Structural Biochemistry I. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 658; also C-L: Cell Biology 658, 
University Program in Genetics 658, Structural Biology and Biophysics 658, Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics 658

Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 
Tim Reddy, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Computational Biology and Bioinformatics (CBB)
510S. Computational Biology Seminar. A weekly series of seminars on topics in computational biology 
presented by invited speakers, Duke faculty and CBB doctoral and certificate students. This course is required 
for all first and second year CBB students. In addition, all certificate students must register and receive credit for 
the seminar for four semesters.



Immunology (IMMUNOL)  809

511. Journal Club. NS, R A weekly series of discussions led by students that focus on current topics in 
computational biology. Topics of discussion may come from recent or seminal publications in computational 
biology or from research interests currently being pursued by students. First and second year CBB doctoral and 
certificate students are strongly encouraged to attend as well as any student interested in learning more about 
the new field of computational biology.
520. Genome Tools and Technologies. This course introduces the laboratory and computational 
methodologies for genetic and protein sequencing, mapping and expression measurement. Instructor: Dietrich. 
One course. C-L: Science & Society
540. Statistical Methods for Computational Biology. Methods of statistical inference and stochastic 
modeling with application to functional genomics and computational molecular biology. Topics include: 
statistical theory underlying sequence analysis and database searching; Markov models; elements of Bayesian 
and likelihood inference; multivariate high-dimensional regression models, applied linear regress analysis; 
discrete data models; multivariate data decomposition methods (PCA, clustering, multi-dimensional scaling); 
software tools for statistical computing. Prerequisites: multivariate calculus, linear algebra and Statistical 
Science 611. Instructor: Mukherjee or Schmidler. One course. C-L: Statistical Science 613
541. Statistical Genetics. Mechanisms, probability models and statistical analysis in examples of classical 
and population genetics, aimed at covering the basic quantitative concepts and tools for biological scientists. 
This module will serve as a primer in basic statistics for genomics, also involving computing and computation 
using standard languages. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Statistical Science 504
550. Computational Structural Biology. QS, R One course. C-L: see Computer Science 664; also C-L: 
Statistical Science 614
574. Modeling and Engineering Gene Circuits (GE, MC). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 
574
590. Special Topics in Computational Biology. Instructor: Staff. One course.
591. Independent Study. Faculty directed experimental or theoretical research. Instructor: Staff. Variable 
credit.
658. Structural Biochemistry I. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 658; also C-L: Cell and Molecular 
Biology 658, Cell Biology 658, University Program in Genetics 658, Structural Biology and Biophysics 658

Immunology
Weiguo Zhang, Director of Undergraduate Studies

Courses in Immunology (IMMUNOL) 
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading of the primary literature in a field of 
special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive paper 
or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading of the primary literature in a field of 
special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive paper 
or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
544. Principles of Immunology. NS, R An introduction to the molecular and cellular basis of the immune 
response. Topics include anatomy of the lymphoid system, lymphocyte biology, antigen-antibody interactions, 
humoral and cellular effector mechanisms, and control of immune responses. Recommended prerequisite: 
Biology 220, 201L, or 203L. Instructor: Zhang. One course. C-L: Biology 515
601. Immunology of Human Diseases. This advanced course will cover the immune aspect of various 
human diseases including autoimmune diseases, allergy, tumor, inflammation and infectious diseases. The 
course will discuss the most recent advancement in immunology of human diseases related to mechanisms and 
treatments. Prerequisite: Immunology 544 or Biology 515. Other basic immunology course taken at another 
institution may be substituted by consent of instructor. Instructor: He. One course.



 Molecular Cancer Biology (MOLCAN)810

Molecular Cancer Biology
Ann Marie Pendergast, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Molecular Cancer Biology (MOLCAN)
533. Essentials of Pharmacology and Toxicology. One course. C-L: see Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 
533; also C-L: Neuroscience 533
551L. Biomedical Optical Spectroscopy and Tissue Optics (GE, IM). One course. C-L: see Biomedical 
Engineering 551L

Molecular Genetics and Microbiology 
David Tobin, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Molecular Genetics and Microbiology (MGM) 
120FS. Ethical Implications of Genetic and Genomic Research. EI, SS, STS This course will examine 
the ethical implications raised by genetic and genomic research. Students will gain an understanding of the 
historical basis of human subjects’ protections in the United States, the ethical pillars of research, and the issues 
that arise from genetics and genomics research. Case studies in genomics research will be used to illustrate 
various ethical implications. Readings will consist of reviews of the history of human subjects’ protections, 
federal regulations, actual informed consent documents, and scientific papers from the primary literature. Open 
only to students in the Focus Program. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Haga. One course. C-L: Public 
Policy 186FS, Human Rights
222FS. Genetics and Epigenetics: The Codes that Control Our Genomes. NS Many inherited cellular 
and physiological traits in humans are not due to changes in DNA sequence, but instead are shaped by factors 
such as age, diet, or environment. This course will examine sequence-independent regulation of the human 
genome, non-genetic diseases, environmental factors that control the epigenome, and multi-generational 
inheritance of epigenetic information (how grandparental experiences shape descendants’ genomes). Course 
readings will be drawn from the primary literature (historical and current) and will be anchored on human 
genetics, although model systems (yeast, Drosophila, plants) will also be discussed. Only open to students in the 
Focus Program. Department consent required. Prerequisite: AP Biology or equivalent. Instructor: Sullivan. One 
course. C-L: Genome Sciences and Policy 222FS
293. Research Independent Study I. R Independent Research in a field of special interest under the 
supervision of a faculty member. Open to sophomores with consent of supervising instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
294. Research Independent Study II. R Continuation of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology 293. 
Independent research in a field of interest under the supervision of a faculty member. Open to sophomores with 
consent of supervising instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
325. Current Technologies in Genomics and Precision Medicine. NS, STS One course. C-L: see 
Biology 325
520. Advanced Topics in Leveraging Fc-mediated Antibody Functions. NS Topics covered will 
include how the genetic and functional properties of the antibody Fc regions and their counterpart Fc-receptors 
can impact and be exploited to treat and prevent infections or cancer. The course will also cover design 
strategies to improve the Fc-mediated functions of monoclonal antibodies used for passive protection and 
treatment, as well as for vaccines to induce Fc-mediated antibody functions in active immunization strategies. 
The course is targeted for post-prelim students interested in state-of-the-art studies in immune responses to 
pathogens and malignancy. Instructor: Ferrari, Moody, Pollara. One course.
522. Critical Readings in Genetics and Genomics. One course. C-L: University Program in Genetics 522
552. Virology. Molecular biology of mammalian viruses, with emphasis on mechanisms of replication, virus-
host interactions, viral pathogenicity, and the relationship of virus infection to neoplasia. Instructor: Luftig and 
staff. One course.



Neurobiology (NEUROBIO)  811

582. Microbial Pathogenesis. Modern molecular genetic approaches to understanding the pathogenic 
bacteria and fungi. Underlying mechanisms of pathogenesis and host-parasite relationships that contribute to 
the infectious disease process. Instructor: Tobin and staff. One course.
593. Research Independent Study. R Independent research in Molecular Genetics and Microbiology. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.

Neurobiology
Jorg Grandl, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Neurobiology (NEUROBIO) 
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading of the primary literature in a field of 
special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive paper 
or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
559. The Biological Basis of Music. Examine how and why we hear what we do, from intra-species 
communication to music. Consider the biological basis of music, in particular the relationship between music 
and speech. Comparison between the operating principles of the auditory system with what is presently 
known about vision. Limited inquiry into the neurobiology of aesthetics. Instructor: Purves. One course. C-L: 
Philosophy 559, Psychology 580
631. Contemporary Topics in Membrane Biology. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 631; also C-L: Cell 
and Molecular Biology 631, Pharmacology and Cancer Biology 631

Pathology
Soman Abraham, Director of Graduate Studies

Course in Pathology (PATHOL)
293. Research Independent Study. R Individual research and reading of the primary literature in a field of 
special interest, under the supervision of a faculty member, the major product of which is a substantive written 
report or oral presentation containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. 
Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.

Pharmacology and Cancer Biology
Jessica Sawyer, Director of Undergraduate Studies

Courses in Pharmacology and Cancer Biology (PHARM)
293. Research Independent Study in Science Education. R Individual research in a field of science 
education (with reference to pharmacology) at the precollege level, under the supervision of a faculty member, 
resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation of study 
results. Open to (juniors and seniors) with consent of supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Biology 25L; 
Chemistry 21L or 23L. Instructor: Sawyer. One course.
294. Research Independent Study in Science Education. R Continuation of Pharmacology 293. Open 
to juniors and seniors with consent of supervising instructor. Prerequisite: Biology 25L; Chemistry 21L or 23L; 
Pharmacology 293. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Sawyer. One course.
350. Pharmacology: Drug Actions and Reactions. NS Mechanisms of drug action, concepts of drug 
toxicity, resistance, tolerance, and drug interactions. Examples of how drugs affect the autonomic and central 
nervous systems, the cardiovascular and endocrine systems, and how drugs treat infection and cancer. This 
course is designed for both science and nonscience majors, but preference will be given to junior biology majors 
concentrating in pharmacology. Recommended prerequisite: introductory biology (Biology 201L, 203L, or 



  Pharmacology and Cancer Biology (PHARM)812

equivalent) and chemistry (Chemistry 101DL or 110DL). Instructor: Sawyer. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 350
360. Drugs, Brain, and Behavior. NS Mechanisms by which psychoactive drugs act. Changes that occur 
with chronic use of drugs; drug abuse and dependence. Social and legal implications of psychoactive drugs. 
Designed for both science and nonscience majors. Emphasis on the reasoning, research designs, and methods 
for understanding drug effects. Prerequisite: introductory biology (Biology 25L) and chemistry (Chemistry 11L, 
12L). Instructor: Kuhn. One course. C-L: Psychology 274, Neuroscience 360
370. Pharmacogenomics and Personalized Medicine. NS Course discusses personalized drug 
development for several diseases and examines how genetic variations in enzymes, receptors, and transporters 
involved in pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics affect drug response. Students are introduced to 
modern molecular techniques (DNA & RNA sequencing, gene expression-DNA microarrays, proteomics, and 
metabolomics) used in the development of personalized medicine. Class participation includes presentation and 
discussion of current journal articles highlighting advances in pharmacogenomics and personalized medicine. 
Open to juniors and seniors. Prerequisite: Biology 201L. Highly recommended: Pharm 350 or 360 and Biochem 
301. Instructor: Kwatra. One course.
393. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a pharmacology-related area under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of the study results. Open to first-year students and sophomores with consent of 
supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a pharmacology-related area under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of the study results. Open to first-year students and sophomores with consent of 
supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
471S. Reward and Addiction. NS, W One course. C-L: see Psychology 471S; also C-L: Neuroscience 471S
493. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a pharmacology-related area under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of the study results. Open to juniors and seniors with consent of supervising 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a pharmacology-related area under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of the study results. Open to juniors and seniors with consent of supervising 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
495. Research Independent Study. R Individual research in a pharmacology-related area under the 
supervision of a faculty member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant 
analysis and interpretation of the study results. Open to juniors and seniors who have already taken 
Pharmacology 493 and 494, with consent of supervising instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
533. Essentials of Pharmacology and Toxicology. Drug absorption, distribution, excretion, and 
metabolism. Structure and activity relationships; drug and hormone receptors and target cell responses. 
Instructor consent required. Prerequisite: introductory biology; Chemistry 201DL; Mathematics 21 and 122. 
Instructor: Slotkin and staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 533, Molecular Cancer Biology 533
534. Interdisciplinary Approach to Pharmacology. Several model systems (cancer, immunological 
disorders, and infectious diseases) will be used to explore the molecular, biochemical, and physiological basis of 
drug action. Consent of instructor required. Instructors: Wang or Staff. One course.
554. Mammalian Toxicology. Principles of toxicology as related to humans. Emphasis on the molecular 
basis for toxicity of chemical and physical agents. Subjects include metabolism and toxicokinetics, toxicologic 
evaluation, toxic agents, target organs, toxic effects, environmental toxicity, management of poisoning, 
epidemiology, risk assessment, and regulatory toxicology, Prerequisite: introductory biology, and Chemistry 
201DL, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Abou-Donia and staff. One course.
631. Contemporary Topics in Membrane Biology. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 631; also C-L: Cell 
and Molecular Biology 631, Neurobiology 631



Structural Biology and Biophysics (SBB) 813

693. Research Independent Study in Science Education. R Individual research in a field of science 
education (with reference to pharmacology) at the precollege/college level, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation 
of study results. Open to all qualified seniors and graduate students with consent of supervising instructor. 
Instructor: Sawyer. One course.
694. Research Independent Study in Science Education. R Individual research in a field of science 
education (with reference to pharmacology) at the precollege/college level, under the supervision of a faculty 
member, resulting in a substantive paper or written report containing significant analysis and interpretation 
of study results. Open to all qualified seniors and graduate students with consent of supervising instructor. 
Instructor: Sawyer. One course.

Structural Biology and Biophysics
Harold Erickson, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in Structural Biology and Biophysics (SBB)
546S. Structural Biology and Biophysics Seminar. Weekly seminars are presented by program students, 
beyond their first year, faculty members, or guest speakers. (Required of all SBB Students.) Instructor: Oas. 
622. Structure of Biological Macromolecules. R One course. C-L: see Biochemistry 622; also C-L: 
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 622
658. Structural Biochemistry I. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 658; also C-L: Cell and Molecular 
Biology 658, Cell Biology 658, University Program in Genetics 658, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 
658
659. Structural Biochemistry II. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 659; also C-L: Cell Biology 659, 
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 659, University Program in Genetics 659
681. Biophysical Methods. One course. C-L: see Biochemistry 681
682T. Advanced Physical Biochemistry. Transient kinetics, computational methods, multidimensional 
NMR, x-ray crystallography, thermodynamics of association. Prerequisite: Structural Biology and Biophysics or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Oas. One course.

University Program in Genetics and Genomics
Don Fox, Director of Graduate Studies

Courses in the University Program in Genetics and Genomics (UPGEN)
522. Critical Readings in Genetics and Genomics. One course. C-L: Molecular Genetics & Microbiology 522
640. Quantitative Approaches to Biological Problems: From Cartoon Models to System 
Behavior. One course. C-L: see Cell and Molecular Biology 640
658. Structural Biochemistry I. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 658; also C-L: Cell and Molecular Biology 
658, Cell Biology 658, Structural Biology and Biophysics 658, Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 658
659. Structural Biochemistry II. Half course. C-L: see Biochemistry 659; also C-L: Cell Biology 659, 
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 659, Structural Biology and Biophysics 659
660. Evolution from a Coalescence Perspective. NS One course. C-L: see Biology 660
668. RNA Biology: Co-Transcriptional and Post-Transcriptional Control of Gene Expression. One 
course. C-L: see Biochemistry 668; also C-L: Cell Biology 668



 Courses of Instruction814

Ja
re

d 
La

za
ru

s



Courses of Instruction 815

Pratt School of Engineering
Professor Bellamkonda, Dean; Professor of the Practice Franzoni, Associate Dean for Undergraduate Education; 
Assistant Deans Cooke, Rawls, and Temiquel-McMillian

Aerospace Engineering
A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The objective of this multidisciplinary program is to educate students in the engineering principles related 

to the conceptualization, design, analysis, and performance of aerospace vehicles and systems. This certificate 
program is available only to students enrolled in the Pratt School of Engineering. 

Program Requirements
Seven courses must be completed to earn the aerospace engineering certificate. The certificate program 

focuses on upper class courses. All engineering undergraduates are eligible to participate in the program and qualify 
for certification. Mechanical engineering is the host department, however there is flexibility for majors in other 
departments to meet the program standards while maintaining program focus and quality. Two courses already 
required for the primary major are permitted. All students are required to take the foundation course Aircraft 
Performance, plus at least one course from the core aerospace electives list (aerospace structures, aerodynamics, 
compressible flow) plus two supporting technical electives (can include relevant independent study). One upper-
level Trinity College course from history or public policy involving the impact of technology on society, or an 
appropriate economics course. See https://www.mems.duke.edu/undergrad/aerospace-engineering-certificate.

Architectural Engineering
A certificate, but not a major, is available in this program. 
The objective of this interdisciplinary program is to provide students with an understanding of the 

relationships between the design elements of buildings and construction processes. This certificate program is 
available only to students enrolled in the Pratt School of Engineering. 

Program Requirements
1. Required courses: 

• Civil and Environmental Engineering 311 (Architectural Engineering I)
• Civil and Environmental Engineering 411 (Architectural Engineering II)
• Civil and Environmental Engineering 422L (Concrete and Composite Structures)
• Civil and Environmental Engineering 423L (Metallic Structures)
• Art History 285 or 285D (Modern Architecture) or Art History 286 or 286D (Contemporary 

Architecture)
2. One of the following elective courses:

• Civil and Environmental Engineering 511 (Construction Management)
• Visual Arts 515S (Representing Architecture: Means and Methods)
• Environment 590 (Sustainable Cities and Urban Design)
• Civil and Environmental Engineering 491 and 4921 (Special Topics in Civil and Environmental 

Engineering)
• Civil and Environmental Engineering 421L2 (Matrix Structural Analysis)
• Engineering 201L2 (Mechanics of Solids)

1 Topics for Civil and Environmental Engineering 491/492 must be appropriately related to architectural engineering and approved in 
advance by Certificate Director.

2 Engineering 201L and Civil and Environmental Engineering 421L are only permitted for use in meeting certificate requirements for 
those students not enrolled in a Civil Engineering (Structures/Mechanics emphasis) degree program.

https://www.mems.duke.edu/undergrad/aerospace-engineering-certificate


 Biomedical Engineering (BME)816

Biomedical Engineering
Professor Chilkoti, Chair; Associate Professor Sommer, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Assistant Professor 
of the Practice Bucholz, Associate Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Barr, Bellamkonda, Bursac, 
Grill, Henriquez, Izatt, Katz, Myers, K. Nightingale, Ramanujam, Rubinstein, Segura, Trahey, Truskey, Varghese, 
Vo-Dinh, von Ramm, Wax, West, You, and Yuan; Associate Professors Collier, Farsiu, Gersbach, Hoffman, Shen, 
and Wolf; Assistant Professors Dunn, Gong, Horstmeyer, Lynch, Musah, Randles, Tadross, Viventi, and Yao; Pro-
fessors Emeriti Clark, Friedman, McElhaney, Neu, Reichert, and Smith; Associate Research Professor Bass; Assis-
tant Research Professor Ding; Professors of the Practice Malkin and Saterbak; Associate Professors of the Practice 
Palmeri and Richardson; Assistant Professor of the Practice Rizk; Lecturer Kim; Instructors Caves, Wallace, and 
Ward; Senior Lecturing Fellow Fearis; Adjunct Professors Johnson and Wilson; Adjunct Associate Professor R. 
Nightingale; Adjunct Assistant Professor Shang

A major is available in this department. 
The biomedical engineering program is accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET.3 We 

expect that after graduation, graduates of our program will be on track to become leaders in corporate, professional, 
and academic communities. In particular, they will: 

• advance in their careers in biomedical engineering or related areas of industry, academia, and 
medicine; 

• engage in lifelong learning, for example, by enrolling in graduate or professional degree programs or 
receiving advanced training for professional advancement; 

• utilize their engineering experience in creating new knowledge or enabling technologies for 
improvement of human health and health care; and 

• understand the social and ethical implications of their work.
Biomedical engineering is the discipline in which the physical, mathematical, and engineering sciences 

and associated technology are applied to biology and medicine. The program is flexible to match the student’s 
interests; options exist for double majors. Each student selects one of four areas of interest in which to obtain 
depth in their education. The areas of interest are matched to the laboratories and expertise of the faculty in 
the department; they are biomechanics and biomaterials, electrobiology, imaging and measurement systems; 
and molecular, cellular, and tissue engineering. Design experience is integrated throughout the curriculum and 
includes capstone design courses. Many students gain valuable design experience in the course of independent 
study projects within the research laboratories of the biomedical engineering department.

The biomechanics laboratories use advanced experimental test facilities, data acquisition technologies, 
computer simulations and theoretical modeling in the study of cells, tissues, and biological structures. The 
mechanisms of injury, aging, degeneration, and mechanical signal transduction are studied in a variety of 
biological systems, including biological fluids, the cervical and lumbar spines, diarthrodial joints, and the heart.

Electrobiology laboratories use large-scale computer modeling, scientific visualization, and experimental 
data acquisition and analysis to increase basic understanding of normal and abnormal electrical activity in the 
brain, peripheral nerves, and heart tissue. Other projects involve the study of the effects of externally applied 
electric fields and radio frequency energy on activity in excitable tissue. 

The ultrasound imaging laboratories develop medical imaging methods that leverage the inherent acoustic 
and mechanical contrast of tissues to improve image quality and provide novel diagnostic information to clinicians. 
The laboratories are equipped with a variety of state-of-the-art clinical and research-dedicated ultrasound imaging 
systems, electronics, and acoustic output characterization tools, as well as acoustic and transducer modeling 
software.

The biophotonics group develops novel photonics technologies for biological and medical applications. 
Research areas include optical imaging techniques, advanced spectroscopy methods, plasmonics applications, 
and new microscopy modalities. Applications span from cell and developmental biology to clinical diagnostics 
and imaging methods. 

Molecular, cellular and tissue engineering is concerned with the regulation of the external and internal 
environment of the cell for control of biosynthesis and degradation activities, as well as determination of the 
factors responsible for differentiation of cells into tissues with varying functional requirements. The groups in 
this program investigate biomaterials, material property characterizations, surface modifications, cell cultures, 
and the mechanics of biofluids, tissues, and cells. Applications include the development of novel biosensors and 
drug delivery systems, new techniques for enhanced biological transport, and improved techniques for stimulated 
repair or inhibited degradation of biological tissues.

Biomedical Engineering (BME)



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 817

Instruction in all these areas is offered at the undergraduate as well as graduate and postdoctoral levels, and 
opportunities for undergraduate student research are available in most of the biomedical engineering laboratories. 
The courses offered by the Department of Biomedical Engineering are listed below. Some biomedical engineering 
courses require students to have a suitable laptop computer with wireless capabilities.

Course Designators:
(AC) Satisfies an Area Core Class
(DR) Satisfies the Design requirement
(GE) Satisfies a Biomedical Engineering General Elective
(BB) Satisfies a Biomechanics and Biomaterials Advanced Elective
(EL) Satisfies an Electrobiology Advanced Elective
(IM) Satisfies an Imaging and Measurement Systems Advanced Elective
(MC) Satisfies a Molecular, Cellular and Tissue Engineering Advanced Elective

Courses in Biomedical Engineering (BME)
195FS. Medical Instrumentation in the Developing World (GE). STS Medical devices have 
revolutionized healthcare in the developed world. Yet, this technology revolution has failed to reach the 
developing world. Compared to the estimated 1.5 million medical devices introduced in the developed world in 
the last 50 years, only a few dozen pieces of medical equipment have been specifically designed to be appropriate 
and affordable for resource poor settings. We will examine and discuss the factors that make the research, 
design & development, introduction & marketing, maintenance and use of medical devices in resource poor 
settings uniquely challenging conditions. Focus students only. Instructor: Malkin. One course. C-L: Science & 
Society 195FS
221L. Biomaterials. This course provides an introduction to Materials Science, with an emphasis on the 
materials and applications relevant to Biomedical Engineering. The course emphasizes the relationships 
between the structure and properties of materials, with a focus on their mechanical, biological, and surface 
properties. Electrical, optical, and thermal properties will also be touched upon. Classes of materials to be 
addressed include metals, polymers, ceramics, gels, and composites. The course will close with an introduction 
to biocompatibility and the foreign body response. Prerequisite: BME 244L. Instructor: Collier, Varghese. One 
course.
230L. Global Women’s Health Technologies. STS Exploration of the intersection of technology, women’s 
health, and global poverty. Analysis of case studies related to human-centered design and applications of 
engineering to solve global health challenges. Hands-on learning of engineering concepts related to circuitry and 
light as well as skills needed to prototype a functional light source. Application of course knowledge in a design 
challenge based on a need from a real-world client in a low-resource setting. Open to both Trinity and Pratt 
students. Instructor: Ramanujam. One course. C-L: Global Health 230L
244L. Quantitative Physiology with Biostatistical Applications. An examination of the importance of 
mass and energy balances, transport processes, mechanics, energetics, and electrical activity in physiological 
systems. Lectures cover cellular physiology, cardiovascular system, nervous system, muscle physiology, and 
renal physiology. Labs complement lecture topics and introduce statistical methods related to the measurement 
and analysis of physiological data. Statistical topics include: descriptive statistics; hypothesis testing; 
correlation, regression, and goodness of fit; ANOVA and post-hoc tests; power analysis and experimental design. 
Prerequisite: Engineering 103L and co-/prerequisite: (Biology 201L or Biology 203L) and (Mathematics 212, 
216, or 353). Instructor: Wallace, Tadross, or Henriquez. One course.
260L. Modeling Cellular and Molecular Systems. An introduction to the application of engineering 
models to study cellular and molecular processes and develop biotechnological applications. Topics covered 
include chemical equilibrium and kinetics, solution of differential equations, enzyme kinetics, DNA denaturation 
and rebinding, the polymerase chain reaction (PCR), repressor binding, gene expression, receptor-mediated 
endocytosis, and gene delivery to tissues and cells. Selected laboratory experiments apply concepts learned in 
class. Corequisite: Biomedical Engineering 244L. Prerequisite: Mathematics 212 or 222; Biology 201L or 203L; 
or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Kim, Saterbak, Truskey, You, or Yuan. One course.
271A. Signals and Systems. Convolution, deconvolution, Fourier series, Fourier transform, sampling, and 
the Laplace transform. Continuous and discrete formulations with emphasis on computational and simulation 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)818

aspects and selected biomedical examples. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 253L or Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 110L; Mathematics 216; or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Bucholz or Malkin. One 
course.
271D. Signals and Systems. Convolution, deconvolution, Fourier series, Fourier transform, sampling, and 
the Laplace transform. Continuous and discrete formulations with emphasis on computational and simulation 
aspects and selected biomedical examples. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 253L or Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 110L; Mathematics 216; or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Bucholz, Farsiu, Izatt, K. 
Nightingale, or Rizk. One course.
290. Intermediate Topics (GE). Intermediate subjects or selective topics related to programs within 
biomedical engineering. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
290L. Intermediate Topics with Lab (GE). Intermediate subjects or selective topics related to programs 
within biomedical engineering. The course includes laboratory exercises. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
301L. Bioelectricity (AC or GE). The electrophysiology of excitable cells from a quantitative perspective. 
Topics include the ionic basis of action potentials, the Hodgkin-Huxley model, impulse propagation, source-field 
relationships, and an introduction to functional electrical stimulation. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 
244L and (Biomedical Engineering 253L or Electrical and Computer Engineering 110L) and (Mathematics 353 
or 353A). Instructor: Bursac, Grill, Gong, Henriquez, or Sommer. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 301L
302L. Fundamentals of Biomaterials and Biomechanics (AC or GE). Principles of materials science 
and mechanics applicable to orthopedics, cell signaling, medical imaging, implant design, injury prevention and 
treatment, cardiovascular mechanics, and tissue engineering. Topics include: structure-function relationships 
of biocomposites; unique properties of biomaterial surfaces; behavior of tissues and materials in physiological 
environments; mechanics of human movement and physiology; dynamics and vibration; and viscoelastic 
models. Selected experimental measurements on biomechanical and biomaterial systems. Prerequisite: 
Biomedical Engineering 244L and (Mathematics 353 or 353A) and Engineering 201L and Mechanical 
Engineering 221L. Instructor: Hoffman, J. Luck, or Myers. One course.
303L. Modern Diagnostic Imaging Systems (AC or GE). The underlying concepts and instrumentation 
of several modern medical imaging modalities. Review of applicable linear systems theory and relevant 
principles of physics. Modalities studied include X-ray radiography (conventional film-screen imaging and 
modern electronic imaging), computerized tomography (including the theory of reconstruction), ultrasound, 
and nuclear magnetic resonance imaging. Prerequisite: BME 244L; BME 271 or 271A or ECE 280L; junior or 
senior standing. Graduate students must get permission. Instructor: Bucholz or Yao. One course.
307. Transport Phenomena in Biological Systems (AC or GE, BB). An introduction to the modeling of 
complex biological systems using principles of transport phenomena and biochemical kinetics. Topics include 
the conservation of mass and momentum using differential and integral balances; rheology of Newtonian and 
non-Newtonian fluids; steady and transient diffusion in reacting systems; dimensional analysis; homogeneous 
versus heterogeneous reaction systems. Biomedical and biotechnological applications are discussed. 
Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 244L, 260L, and Mathematics 353. Instructor: Katz, Randles, Truskey, 
Wallace, or Yuan. One course.
354L. Introduction to Medical Instrumentation. Study of the basic principles of biomedical electronics 
with emphasis on transducers, instruments, micro-controller and PC based systems for data acquisition and 
processing. Laboratories focus on measurements and circuit design emphasizing design criteria appropriate 
for biomedical instrumentation. Prerequisite: Physics 152L; Mathematics 353 or 353A; BME 244L; ECE 
110L or BME 253L; BME 271 or BME 271A or ECE 280L; or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Malkin, K. 
Nightingale, Palmeri, Trahey, Wolf, or Viventi. One course.
390L. Special Topics with a Lab. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor: Staff. One course.
390S. Special Topics Seminar in BME. Topics vary from semester to semester. Instructor consent 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
394. Projects in Biomedical Engineering (GE). For juniors and seniors who express a desire for 
such work and who have shown aptitude for research in one area of biomedical engineering. Reserved for 



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 819

Engineering Undergraduate Fellows. Consent of program director required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
432L. Biomechanics and Vehicle Safety Engineering (DR). Design course dealing with contemporary 
issues in the biomechanics of injury and motor vehicle safety engineering. Covers international standards for 
safety in vehicle design. Topics also include: airbag and belt systems, structural vehicle components, accident 
reconstruction, the biomechanics of injury, anthropomorphic test devices, and injury risk assessment metrics. 
Problem-based approach where students work as teams on a current engineering problem in dummy design 
or injury mitigation technology. The teams set design specifications, evaluate the designs use finite element 
analysis and fabricate the final product using rapid prototyping. Prerequisite: BME 302L; senior standing. 
Instructor: J. Luck. One course.
436L. Biophotonic Instrumentation (DR). Design of optical instruments for biomedical applications. 
Section I focuses on basic optics theory and laboratory practice. Section II focuses on deeper understanding of 
selected biophotonic instruments, including laboratory work. Section III comprises the design component of the 
course. Student teams are presented with a design challenge and work through the steps of engineering design, 
culminating in building a prototype solution. Lecture topics include engineering design, intellectual property 
protection, engineering ethics, and safety. Prerequisite: BME 354L; senior standing. Instructors: Izatt or Wax. 
One course.
460L. Devices for People with Disabilities (DR). Design of custom devices to aid disabled individuals. 
Students will be paired with health care professionals at local hospitals who will supervise the development 
of projects for specific clients. Formal engineering design principles will be emphasized; overview of assistive 
technologies, patent issues, engineering ethics. Oral and written reports will be required. Selected projects 
may be continued as independent study. Course includes a service-learning component involving work in the 
community. Prerequisites: BME 354L; senior standing. Instructor: Caves. One course.
462L. Design for the Developing World (DR). Design of custom devices to help the specific and unique 
needs of developing world hospitals. Formal engineering design principles will be emphasized; overview of 
developing world conditions, patent issues, engineering ethics. Oral and written reports will be required. 
Students may elect to personally deliver their projects to a developing world hospital, if selected, in the summer 
following the course. Prerequisite: BME 354L; senior standing. Instructor: Malkin. One course.
464L. Medical Instrument Design (DR). General principles of signal acquisition, amplification processing, 
recording, and display in medical instruments. System design, construction, and evaluation techniques will be 
emphasized. Methods of real-time signal processing will be reviewed and implemented in the laboratory. Each 
student will design, construct, and demonstrate a functional medical instrument and collect and analyze data 
with that instrument. Formal write-ups and presentations of each project will be required. Prerequisite: BME 
354L; senior standing. Instructors: Wolf, Palmeri, Richardson, or von Ramm. One course.
473L. Medical Device Design I. This course is the first of a two-semester design sequence that will 
immerse students in a formal engineering design process. Students will work on authentic design problems 
identified with Duke Medical Center clinicians and local medical technology companies. Students will develop 
and determine design feasibility for a device, system, material or process, subject to real-world constraints, 
including time, money, and resources. Students will be expected to formally communicate design objectives and 
performance in written and oral form. Corequisite: Biomedical Engineering 354L. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Palmeri or Richardson. One course.
474L. Medical Device Design II. This course is the second of a two-semester design sequence that immerses 
students in a formal engineering design process working on authentic design problems identified with Duke 
Medical Center clinicians and local medical technology companies. This second-semester course allows the 
students to progress through low-to-mid-to-high fidelity prototypes and evaluate their designs in the context of 
industry standards. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 473L. Instructor: Palmeri or Richardson. One course.
490L. Special Topics in Biomedical Engineering Design (DR). Design of biomedical devices 
emphasizing formal engineering design principles, as well as building and testing a prototype. Lecture topics 
include engineering design, intellectual property protection, engineering ethics, and safety. Oral and written 
reports are required. Used for new design courses in BME. Prerequisites: Senior standing and consent of the 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Projects in Biomedical Engineering (GE). For juniors and seniors who express a desire for such 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)820

work and who have shown aptitude for research in one area of biomedical engineering. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493-1. Projects in Biomedical Engineering (GE). For juniors and seniors who express a desire for such 
work and who have shown aptitude for research in one area of biomedical engineering. Consent of instructor 
required. Half-credit version of BME 493. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
494. Projects in Biomedical Engineering (GE). For juniors or seniors who express a desire for such 
work and who have shown aptitude for research in one area of biomedical engineering. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494-1. Projects in Biomedical Engineering. For juniors or seniors who express a desire for such work and 
who have shown aptitude for research in one area of biomedical engineering. Consent of instructor required. 
Half-credit version of BME 494. Instructor: Staff. Half course.
502. Neural Signal Acquisition (GE, IM, EL). This course will be an exploration of analog and digital 
signal processing techniques for measuring and characterizing neural signals. The analog portion will cover 
electrodes, amplifiers, filters and A/D converters for recording neural electrograms and EEGs. The digital 
portion will cover methods of EEG processing including spike detection and spike sorting. A course pack 
of relevant literature will be used in lieu of a textbook. Students will be required to write signal-processing 
algorithms. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 354L. Instructor: Wolf. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 502
503. Computational Neuroengineering (GE, EL). This course introduces students to the fundamentals 
of computational modeling of neurons and neuronal circuits and the decoding of information from populations 
of spike trains. Topics include: integrate and fire neurons, spike response models, homogeneous and 
inhomogeneous Poisson processes, neural circuits, Weiner (optimal) adaptive filters, neural networks for 
classification, population vector coding and decoding. Programming assignments and projects will be carried 
out using MATLAB. Prerequisites: Biomedical Engineering 301L or equivalent. Instructor: Henriquez. One 
course. C-L: Neuroscience 503
504. Fundamentals of Electrical Stimulation of the Nervous System (GE, EL). This course presents 
a quantitative approach to the fundamental principles, mechanisms, and techniques of electrical stimulation 
required for non-damaging and effective application of electrical stimulation. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Grill. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 504
505L. Biopotential Amplifiers and Implant Devices (GE, EL, IM). Prerequisite: BME 301L or graduate 
standing. Instructor: Viventi. One course.
506. Measurement and Control of Cardiac Electrical Events (GE, EL, IM). Design of biomedical 
devices for cardiac application based on a review of theoretical and experimental results from cardiac 
electrophysiology. Evaluation of the underlying cardiac events using computer simulations. Examination 
of electrodes, amplifiers, pacemakers, and related computer apparatus. Construction of selected examples. 
Prerequisites: Biomedical Engineering 301L; 354L or instructor consent. Instructor: Wolf. One course.
507. Cardiovascular System Engineering, Disease and Therapy (GE, BB, EL). Introductory 
and advanced topics in anatomy, physiology, pathophysiology, and modeling of the cardiovascular system. 
Theoretical and bioengineering concepts of heart electrical and mechanical function and circulatory system 
at cellular, tissue, and organ level. Computational models of cardiac electrical and mechanical activity and 
pressures and volumes within circulatory system. Contemporary cell, gene, and device-based therapies for 
treatment of cardiac and cardiovascular disease. The course enhances students’ knowledge of cardiovascular 
system function with the emphasis of underlying engineering principles. Prerequisites: two of Biomedical 
Engineering 301L, 302L, 307 or graduate standing in BME. Instructor: Bursac. One course.
510. Bayesian Analysis in Biomedical Engineering (GE, EL). The application of Bayesian statistics to 
questions in BME broadly with a focus on electrotrocardiography. Topics include a brief history of Bayesian 
math in biology and medicine, use of likelihood functions and prior distributions, the Bayesian outlook toward 
medical diagnosis, the work of Cornfield, Pipberger, and Dunn on the classification of electrocardiograms, and 
a Bayesian framework for the cardiac inverse problem. The approaches used for these topics can be adapted to 
many other BME situations. Prerequisites: Senior or graduate standing. Instructor: Barr. One course.
511L. Intermediate Bioelectricity (GE, EL). Study of the origins of clinically-relevant electrical signals, 



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 821

such as EEG, ECG, or EMG. Generation of biopotentials by active cells, fibers, and tissues. Transmission 
of biopotentials to the measuring electrodes through intervening tissues; effects of inhomogeneities and 
anisotropy. Students develop models of biopotentials and learn numerical and mathematical tools for 
solving and analyzing these models. Laboratory exercises based on computer simulations, with emphasis on 
quantitative behavior. Readings from original literature. Prerequisite: BME 301L or consent of the instructor. 
Instructor: Barr or Henriquez. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 511L
512L. Cardiac Bioelectricity (GE, EL). Electrophysiological behavior of cardiac muscle. Emphasis on 
quantitative study of cardiac tissue with respect to propagation and the evaluation of sources. Effect of junctions, 
inhomogeneities, anisotropy, and presence of unbounded extracellular space. Bidomain models. Study of models 
of arrhythmia, fibrillation, and defibrillation. Electrocardiographic models and forward simulations. Laboratory 
exercises based on computer simulation, with emphasis on quantitative behavior and design. Readings from 
original literature. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 301L or equivalent. Instructor: Barr or Henriquez. One 
course.
513. Introduction to Neurodynamics (GE, EL). Behavior of neurons and neuronal networks examined 
with methods of nonlinear dynamics. Interpretation in phase space of excitability, spiking, bursting, phase 
locking, synchronization, competition, and chaos. Applications to the development of novel neurostimulation 
methods and to understanding dynamic mechanisms behind sensing, learning, memory, and cognition. 
Readings from the original literature. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 513
515. Neural Prosthetic Systems (GE, EL, IM). Covers several systems that use electrical stimulation 
or recording of the nervous system to restore function following disease or injury. For each system, the 
underlying biophysical basis for the treatment, the technology underlying the treatment, and the associated 
clinical applications and challenges are examined. Systems to be covered include cochlear implants, spinal cord 
stimulation of pain, vagus nerve stimulation for epilepsy, deep brain stimulation for movement disorders, sacral 
root stimulation for bladder dysfunction, and neuromuscular electrical stimulation for restoration of movement. 
Prerequisite: BME 301L or ECE 110L. Instructor: Grill. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 515
517. Neuronal Control of Movement (GE, EL). Course for graduate and upper-level undergraduate 
students to provide them with an understanding of the neuronal circuits that move our bodies and with 
techniques for analysis, simulation, and modification of these circuits by neural engineers. Topics start in the 
periphery with muscles, the spine, and functional electrical stimulation; then proceed centrally to subcortical 
circuits, deep brain stimulation, and forward models; and conclude with cerebral cortical networks and 
population decoding. Students are expected to have background in bioelectricity and Matlab programming. 
Prerequisites: BME 301L or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Sommer. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 507
518L. Modern Neuroscience Tools (GE, IM, EL). QS This course introduces students to the various 
modern tools used to study the function of the brain, and the underlying biophysics of these tools. Content will 
focus on novel technologies and techniques that employ electrophysiology and optogenetics. Prerequisite: BME 
301L. Instructor: Gong. One course.
521. Biomaterials: Interfaces between Materials and Biology (GE, MC, BB). An examination of 
the processes that occur when biomaterials are placed into physiological contexts. The course will focus first 
on processes that occur on the surfaces of materials when exposed to any biological media: surface energy 
and wettability, protein adsorption, fouling, and biofilm formation. Topics dealing with the performance 
of biomaterials in humans will then be presented in order of increasing complexity: blood clotting and 
thrombogenesis, fibrous encapsulation of bioinert materials, inflammatory processes, macrophage polarization, 
innate immunity, and adaptive immunity. Prerequisite: BME 302L, 307, or graduate student standing. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
522. Advanced Biomaterials (GE, BB). This course will provide students with advanced knowledge of 
biomaterials and biocompatibility and their application in medical devices. Topics covered will include how 
non-covalent interactions drive protein adsorption and self-assembly of materials, cell-material interactions, 
bioactive biomaterials, smart materials, microfabrication, and nanotechnology. We will explore application 
materials in areas such as cardiovascular devices, orthopedic implants, tissue engineering and drug delivery. 
Prerequisite: BME 302L, graduate standing, or consent of instructor. Instructor: West. One course.
523. Biomedical Polymers (GE, BB, MC). Course covers applications of polymers in medicine, particularly 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)822

drug delivery, gene delivery, and tissue engineering. Most recent advances in the field will be discussed. 
Students’ critical understanding of the concepts covered in the class will be evaluated through written and oral 
presentations. This is course primarily intended for seniors and graduate students. Prerequisites: BME 302L; 
graduate students need consent of the instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
524. Nanotechnology in Medicine (GE, BB, MC). Nanomedicine impacts biomedical sciences by applying 
nanotechnology to develop devices with nanoscale features for applications in therapeutics, diagnostics, and 
molecular tools. The course covers the application of nanotechnology to advance drug therapy, gene therapy, 
immunotherapy, and cell therapy and discusses engineering design and fabrication strategies for practical 
implementation. Most recent advances in the field will be discussed. Student’s critical understanding will be 
evaluated through written or oral presentations. Prerequisite: BME 302L or BME 307 or permission of the 
instructor. Instructor: West. One course.
525. Biomedical Materials and Artificial Organs (GE, BB). Chemical structures, processing methods, 
evaluation procedures, and regulations for materials used in biomedical applications. Applications include 
implant materials, components of ex vivo circuits, and cosmetic prostheses. Primary emphasis on polymer-
based materials and on optimization of parameters of materials which determine their utility in applications 
such as artificial kidney membranes and artificial arteries. Prerequisites: ME 221L or graduate standing in BME 
or ME; BME 302L recommended. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials 
Science 518
526. Elasticity (GE, BB). One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 521
527. Cell Mechanics and Mechanotransduction (GE, BB, MC). An examination of the mechanical 
properties of cells and forces exerted by cells in biological processes of clinical and technological importance, 
and the processes by which mechanical forces are converted into biochemical signals and activate gene 
expression. Topics include measurement of mechanical properties of cells, cytoskeleton mechanics, models of 
cell mechanical properties, cell adhesion, effects of physical forces on cell function, and mechanotransduction. 
Students critically evaluate current literature and analyze models of cell mechanics and mechanotransduction. 
Prerequisites: BME 302L or BME 307; knowledge of cell biology. Instructor: Hoffman or Truskey. One course.
528. Biofluid Mechanics (GE, BB, MC). Methods and applications of fluid mechanics in biological and 
biomedical systems including: Governing equations and methods of solutions, (e.g. conservation of mass flow 
and momentum), the nature of biological fluids, (e.g. non Newtonian rheological behavior), basic problems 
with broad relevance, (e.g. flow in pipes, lubrication theory), applications to cells and organs in different 
physiological systems, (e.g. cardiovascular, gastrointestinal, respiratory, reproductive and musculoskeletal 
systems), applications to diagnosis and therapy, (e.g. drug delivery and devices). Prerequisite: Biomedical 
Engineering 307 or graduate student standing. Instructor: Katz. One course.
529. Theoretical and Applied Polymer Science (GE, BB). One course. C-L: see Mechanical Engineering 
and Materials Science 514
530. Introduction to Tissue Biomechanics (GE, BB). Introduction to the mechanical behaviors of 
biological tissues, cells and molecules of the musculoskeletal and cardiovascular systems. Topics to be covered 
include static force analysis and nonlinear optimization theory; linearly elastic models for stress-strain analysis 
and solutions to relevant problems in bioelasticity; models of active structures (e.g., muscles); and introductory 
theory for finite element analysis. Emphasis will be placed on modeling stress-strain relations with relevance to 
biological tissues, including experimental means to measure stress and strain in these structures. Prerequisites: 
Engineering 201 or equivalent; Biomedical Engineering 302 or equivalent; Mathematics 353. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
531. Intermediate Biomechanics (GE, BB). Introduction to solid and orthopaedic biomechanical analyses 
of complex tissues and structures. Topics to be covered include: spine biomechanics, elastic modeling of bone, 
linear and quasi-linear viscoelastic properties of soft tissue (for example, tendon and ligament), and active tissue 
responses (for example, muscle). Emphasis will be placed on experimental techniques used to evaluate these 
tissues. Student seminars on topics in applied biomechanics will be included. Prerequisite: Engineering 201L; 
Mathematics 353. Instructor: Myers, J. Luck. One course.
535. Biomedical Aspects of Blast and Ballistics (GE, BB). Introduction to the biomechanical basis and 



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 823

medical consequences of human injury from blast and ballistics. Exploration of blast and ballistics injuries in 
both biomechanics and medicine covering the etiology and state-of-the-art analytic and biomechanical models 
of human injury. Evolution of medical opinion compared to contemporary knowledge of ballistics and blast. 
Focus on injuries to the head, neck, thorax, abdomen and extremities, and associated medical consequences, 
including shock, immune system response, traumatic brain injury (TBI) and posttraumatic stress disorder 
(PTSD). Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 302L, graduate standing, or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Bass and Capehart. One course.
542. Principles of Ultrasound Imaging (GE, IM). Propagation, reflection, refraction, and diffraction 
of acoustic waves in biologic media. Topics include geometric optics, physical optics, attenuation, and image 
quality parameters such as signal-to-noise ratio, dynamic range, and resolution. Emphasis is placed on the 
design and analysis of medical ultrasound imaging systems. Prerequisites: Biomedical Engineering 303; 
Engineering 103L; or instructor consent. Instructor: K. Nightingale, von Ramm, or Trahey. One course.
543L. Cardiac Ultrasound Imaging and Function (GE, IM). Course combines medical instrumentation 
with a contrasting engineering and clinical perspective, with a focus on ultrasound cardiac imaging and 
measurement. The classroom aspect covers the physical basis of ultrasound cardiac imaging and measurements. 
The clinical component consists of cardiac anatomy and physiology, case studies, and clinical observations. 
The course includes two cardiac dissections and a hands-on experience in the Human Anatomy Lab. Students 
are required to develop image analysis software from supplied clinical 3D images to automatically determine 
quantitative physical descriptors of cardiac function. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 354L or instructor 
consent. Instructor consent required. Instructor: von Ramm. One course.
544. Digital Image Processing (GE, IM). Introduction to the theory and methods for digital image 
sampling, enhancement, visualization, reconstruction, and analysis with emphasis on medical applications. 
Course Outline: #1: Introduction, history, and applications of image processing. #2: Spatial domain image 
enhancement. #3: Fourier domain image enhancement. #4: Image registration. #5: Inverse problems 
(denoising, deblurring, interpolation, and super-resolution). #6: Wavelets and compressive sensing. #7: 
Biological image processing. Undergraduate courses on signals and systems, probability and statistics 
recommended; knowledge of Matlab required. Prerequisites: Biomedical Engineering 271 or Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 280L or consent of the instructor. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Farsiu. One 
course.
545. Acoustics and Hearing (GE, EL, IM). The generation and propagation of acoustic (vibrational) waves 
and their reception and interpretation by the auditory system. Topics under the heading of generation and 
propagation include free and forced vibrations of discrete and continuous systems, resonance and damping, 
and the wave equation and solutions. So that students may understand the reception and interpretation of 
sound, the anatomy and physiology of the mammalian auditory system are presented; and the mechanics of the 
middle and inner ears are studied. Prerequisites: Biomedical Engineering 271 or equivalent; Mathematics 353. 
Instructor: Trahey. One course. C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 584
546. Magnetic Resonance Imaging: Physical Principles and Sequence Design (GE, IM). An 
in-depth exploration of the physics and engineering in developing Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI). 
Topics covered include Gradient Recalled Echo, Spin Echo, Inversion Recovery, field of view and resolution 
constraints/requirements, signal processing, image artifacts, the Bloch Equation, fat suppression techniques, 
and the derivation of MR signal equation. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 303 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Bucholz. One course.
547. Medical Software Design (GE, IM). QS Software is critical in many medical devices, including device 
control, feedback and signal processing. This course focuses on software development skills that are ubiquitous 
in the medical device industry, including software version control, unit testing, fault tolerance, continuous 
integration testing and documentation. Experience will be gained in Python and JavaScript. The course will be 
structured around a project, done in small student groups, to build an Internet-connected medical device that 
measures and processes a biosignal, sends it to a web server, and makes those data accessible to a web client/
mobile application. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 271, Biomedical Engineering 271A, or graduate 
student standing. Instructor: Palmeri, Ward, or Wax. One course.
548L. Machine Learning and Imaging (GE, IM). Deep learning is rapidly changing how we interpret 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)824

image data. A large amount of research is now examining how we can use new machine learning tools to 
automatically interpret microscope, ultrasound and x-ray images, and MRI and CT scans, for example, to aid 
with diagnostic tasks. In this class, we will review how these machine learning tools work, with a particular 
focus on how they might be used in a diagnostic setting. This class will also investigate the specific question of 
how deep learning algorithms can be used to design imaging system hardware to improve performance, which 
will be the primary focus of the course final project. Prerequisite: BME 303L or graduate standing. Instructor: 
Horstmeyer. One course.
550. Modern Microscopy (GE, IM). Overview of novel microscopy techniques that are under development 
in research laboratories. New techniques are placed in context with basic understanding of image formation in 
conventional microscopy and laboratory work which applies this knowledge. A group project offers opportunity 
to examine special topics of interest. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 354 and 303; consent of the 
instructor. Instructor: Wax. One course.
551L. Biomedical Optical Spectroscopy and Tissue Optics (GE, IM). This course is designed to provide 
students with a working knowledge of the theoretical and experimental principles underlying the application of 
optical spectroscopy and tissue optics in biological and biomedical engineering. Topics covered in this course 
include: Absorption Spectroscopy; Scattering Spectroscopy; Fluorescence Spectroscopy; Tissue Optics; Monte 
Carlo Modeling; Diffusion Modeling; Spectroscopic System Design and Signal to Noise Analysis; and Molecular 
Imaging. This course also includes labs for each topic that is covered, journal article review on emerging 
technologies and a term project. Prerequisite: Physics 152L. Instructors: Izatt, Ramanujam, or Wax. One course. 
C-L: Molecular Cancer Biology 551L
552. Advanced Optics. QS One course. C-L: see Physics 621; also C-L: Electrical and Computer Engineering 
541
555. Advances in Photonics (GE, IM). Overview of photonics techniques and their applications. The course 
will enhance students’ understanding and knowledge of advanced techniques and introduce them to a variety of 
applications in photonics, the science and technology associated with interactions of light with matter. Photonics 
techniques include: advanced luminescence, Raman and SERS, optical coherence, advanced microscopy, 
near-field and confocal methods, remote sensing, and optical biosensing. Applications include: environmental 
sensing, medical diagnostics, assays using optical detection, optics in multispectral imaging, photonics and solar 
cells, and nanophotonics. Prerequisite: senior or graduate standing in BME or Chemistry. Instructor: Vo-Dinh. 
One course. C-L: Chemistry 630
560. Molecular Basis of Membrane Transport (GE, EL, MC). Transport of substances through cell 
membranes examined on a molecular level, with applications of physiology, drug delivery, artificial organs and 
tissue engineering. Topics include organization of the cell membrane, membrane permeability and transport, 
active transport and control of transport processes. Assignments based on computer simulations, with emphasis 
on quantitative behavior and design. Prerequisites: BME 260L or instructor consent, Mathematics 216 or 
equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Neuroscience 560
561L. Genome Science and Technology Lab (GE, MC). Study of the basic principles of epigenetics, 
genomics, and human stem cell biology as applied to medical diagnostics and tissue engineering. Focus on 
engineering of living systems will include collaboration with clinicians, laboratories on DNA/RNA isolation, 
genotyping, qPCR and stem cell culture; overview of organ on a chip technology and statistical approach to large 
data towards risk prediction, early detection and disease prevention. Oral and written lab reports required; 
select projects may be continued as independent study. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One 
course. C-L: Computational Biology and Bioinformatics 561L, Science & Society
562. Biology by Design (GE, MC). Engineering biological systems emphasizing synthetic biology and the 
application of biological/chemical principles to the design of new biomolecules and cellular pathways. Review 
of primary scientific literature, highlighting contemporary research in this area, including artificial amino and 
nucleic acids, gene regulatory systems, directed molecular evolution, recombinant antibodies, novel biosynthesis 
pathways, cell communication, and the design of minimal organisms. Topics are presented with applications 
such as drug design, discovery, productions, regenerative medicine, and bioremediation. Prerequisite: 
Biomedical Engineering 244L. Organic chemistry or biochemistry suggested. Instructor consent required. 
Instructor: Gersbach. One course.



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 825

563. Transport Processes in HIV Transmission and Prevention (GE, BB, MC). Application of 
transport theory to analyze processes of HIV migration to target cells in the mucosa of the lower female 
reproductive tract. Analysis of the introduction, transport and bioactivity of molecules that inhibit these 
HIV-infection processes, including those acting topically (microbicides) and those introduced in a variety of 
drug delivery vehicles: semi-solid materials (gels, films) and solid materials (intravaginal rings). A succession 
of mathematical models will describe elements of the fundamental biology of this system and analyze the 
performance of specific products that act prophylactically against HIV infection. Prerequisite: Biomedical 
Engineering 307 or graduate student standing. Instructor: Katz. One course.
565L. Environmental Molecular Biotechnology (GE, MC). One course. C-L: see Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 661L
566. Transport Phenomena in Cells and Organs (GE, MC). Applications of the principles of mass and 
momentum transport to the analysis of selected processes of biomedical and biotechnological interest. Emphasis 
on the development and critical analysis of models of the particular transport process. Topics include: reaction-
diffusion processes, transport in natural and artificial membranes, dynamics of blood flow, pharmacokinetics, 
receptor-mediated processes and macromolecular transport, normal and neoplastic tissue. Prerequisite: 
Biomedical Engineering 307 or equivalent. Instructor: Truskey or Yuan. One course.
567. Biosensors (GE, IM, MC). Theory and applications of biosensors. Basic principles of interactions 
between analytes and bioreceptors and various transduction techniques: optical, electrochemical, ion-selective 
electrode-based, voltametric, conductometric, and mass-sensitive techniques as well as novel nanotechnology-
based biosensing systems including nanosensors, plasmonic nanoprobes, quantum dots, carbon nanotubes, 
molecular beacons, and molecular sentinel systems. Applications in chemical, environmental, biological and 
medical sensing. Paired with Chemistry 601. Prerequisites: senior or graduate standing in BME or instructor’s 
consent. Instructor: Vo-Dinh. One course.
568. Laboratory in Cellular and Biosurface Engineering (GE, MC). Introduction to common 
experimental and theoretical methodologies in cellular and biosurface engineering. Experiments may include 
determination of protein and peptide diffusion coefficients in alginate beads, hybridoma cell culture and 
antibody production, determination of the strength of cell adhesion, characterization of cell adhesion or protein 
adsorption by total internal reflection fluorescence, and Newtonian and non-Newtonian rheology. Laboratory 
exercises are supplemented by lectures on experiment design, data analysis, and interpretation. Prerequisites: 
Biomedical Engineering 307 or equivalent. Instructor: Truskey. One course.
569. Cell Transport Mechanisms (GE, MC). Analysis of the migration of cells through aqueous media. 
Focus on hydrodynamic analysis of the directed self-propulsion of individual cells, use of random walk concepts 
to model the nondirected propulsion of individual cells, and development of kinetic theories of the migrations of 
populations of cells. Physical and chemical characteristics of the cells’ environments that influence their motion, 
including rheologic properties and the presence of chemotactic, stimulatory, or inhibitory factors. Cell systems 
include mammalian sperm migration through the female reproductive tract, protozoa, and bacteria. Emphasis 
on mathematical theory. Experimental designs and results. Prerequisites: Biomedical Engineering 307 and 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Katz. One course.
570L. Introduction to Biomolecular Engineering (GE, BB, MC). Techniques of molecular biology 
through linked lectures and laboratory exercises with emphasis on molecular tools to manipulate and 
analyze DNA and RNA for specific molecular bioengineering applications. Lectures cover the genetic code, 
replication, transcription, translation, cloning vectors for E. coli, enzymatic manipulation of DNA, gene cloning, 
synthetic gene design and assembly, DNA sequencing, polymerase chain reaction, site-directed mutagenesis, 
overexpression and purification of recombinant proteins. Laboratory exercises, linked to lectures, cover cloning, 
mutagenesis and recombinant protein expression and purification. Prerequisites: BIO 201L or BME 260L or 
graduate standing in BME. Instructor: Chilkoti. One course.
571L. Biotechnology and Bioprocess Engineering (GE, BB, MC). Introduction to the engineering 
principles of bioprocess engineering. Topics include: introduction to cellular and protein structure and function; 
modeling of enzyme kinetics, DNA transcription, metabolic pathways, cell and microbial growth and product 
formation; bioprocess operation, scale-up, and design. Class includes a design project. A modern biotechnology 
process or product is identified, the specific application and market are described (for example, medical, 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)826

environmental, agricultural) along with the engineering elements of the technology. Prerequisite: Mechanical 
Engineering 221L. Instructor: Chilkoti. One course.
572L. Cancer and Stem Cell Technology. NS This course introduces advanced topics in cancer and stem 
cell biology as well as emerging areas for clinical applications. Topics include: cancer genetics/epigenetics, 
signaling and regulatory pathways, tumor microenvironment, cancer metabolism, bioinformatics, precision 
medicine, immunotherapy, development, embryonic stem cells, adult tissue stem cells, and organoids. Students 
will learn to perform cancer/stem cell-related molecular and cellular assays. The course comprises lectures, 
student presentations, computational dry lab, and wet lab experiments. Prerequisite: BME 307. Instructor: 
Shen. One course.
574. Modeling and Engineering Gene Circuits (GE, MC). This course discusses modeling 
and engineering gene circuits, such as prokaryotic gene expression, cell signaling dynamics, cell-cell 
communication, pattern formation, stochastic dynamics in cellular networks and its control by feedback or 
feedforward regulation, and cellular information processing. The theme is the application of modeling to 
explore “design principles” of cellular networks, and strategies to engineer such networks. Students need to 
define an appropriate modeling project. At the end of the course, they’re required to write up their results 
and interpretation in a research-paper style report and give an oral presentation. Prerequisites: Biomedical 
Engineering 260L or consent of instructor. Instructor: You. One course. C-L: Computational Biology and 
Bioinformatics 574
577. Drug Delivery (GE, BB, MC). Introduction to drug delivery in solid tumors and normal organs (for 
example, reproductive organs, kidney, skin, eyes). Emphasis on quantitative analysis of drug transport. Specific 
topics include: physiologically-based pharmacokinetic analysis, microcirculation, network analysis of oxygen 
transport, transvascular transport, interstitial transport, transport across cell membrane, specific issues in 
the delivery of cells and genes, drug delivery systems, and targeted drug delivery. Prerequisite: Biomedical 
Engineering 307 and (Engineering 103L or Computer Science 201); or graduate standing. Instructor: Yuan. One 
course.
578. Quantitative Cell and Tissue Engineering (GE, BB, MC). This course will serve as an overview of 
selected topics and problems in the emerging field of tissue engineering. General topics include cell sourcing 
and maintenance of differentiated state, culture scaffolds, cell-biomaterials interactions, bioreactor design, and 
surgical implantation considerations. Specific tissue types to be reviewed include cartilage, skin equivalents, 
blood vessels, myocardium and heart valves, and bioartificial livers. Prerequisite: Biomedical Engineering 302L 
or 307 or PhD student standing. Instructor: Bursac. One course.
590. Special Topics in Biomedical Engineering. Special subjects related to programs within biomedical 
engineering tailored to fit the requirements of a small group. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
590L. Special Topics with Lab. To be used as a “generic” course number for any special topics course with 
lab sections. Instructor: Staff. One course.
601L. Introduction to Neural Engineering. Introduction to neural engineering with emphasis on the 
electrophysiology of neurons from a quantitative perspective. Topics include the ionic basis of action potentials, 
the Hodgkin-Huxley model, impulse propagation, source-field relationships, and an introduction to functional 
electrical stimulation. Not open to students who have taken BME 244L, 301L, 302L, 303L, or 307. Instructor: 
Sommer or Grill. One course.
609. Optics and Photonics Seminar Series. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 549; also C-L: 
Physics 549
671L. Signal Processing and Applied Mathematics. This introductory applied mathematics course for 
graduate students covers the basics of linear systems theory including convolutions, Fourier Series, Fourier 
Transforms, and Laplace Transforms with emphasis on application to biomedical systems. Students will also 
get a basic understanding of how to program in MATLAB as they apply the course material to process sounds, 
images, and other biological signals. Not open to students who have taken BME 271. Instructor: Bucholz. One 
course.



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 827

The Major
The major requirements are included in the minimum total of 34.0 course credits listed under general 

requirements. The following specific courses or their approved alternatives must be included: Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 110L; Engineering 201L; Biomedical Engineering 244L, 260L, 271, 354L; Mechanical 
Engineering 221L; two Area of Interest core classes (Biomedical Engineering 301L, 302L, 303, 307); two Advanced 
Electives from one selected Area of Interest; another Advanced Elective and one General Elective in biomedical 
engineering; and one biomedical engineering design course (Biomedical Engineering 427L, 432L, 436L, 460L, 
462L, 464L, 490L). The BME Undergraduate Program Handbook (available on the departmental website at 
https://bme.duke.edu/undergrad/curriculum) provides updated information and examples of course sequences 
that incorporate all general requirements and departmental requirements comprising the accredited biomedical 
engineering major.

To encourage depth in a specific area of biomedical engineering, students select two Areas of Interest in the 
junior year. There are four areas of interest: (1) biomechanics and biomaterials (BB), (2) electrobiology (EL), (3) 
imaging and measurement systems (IM), and (4) molecular, cellular, and tissue engineering (MC). Students must 
take one core class in each of their two selected areas followed by two Advanced Electives in one of the selected 
areas. All biomedical engineering elective courses have a general elective (GE) designation. Some 500-level course 
are designated as Advanced Electives, also, and may have one or more area of interest designations (BB, EL, IM, 
MC). Students are encouraged to consult with their advisors when selecting areas of interest and electives.

Students intending to study abroad should plan to travel in the fall semester of their junior year. These 
students should consult with both their advisor and the Global Education Office about course planning. Premed 
students need to take Chemistry 201L and 202L, Biology 201L or 203L, and Biochemistry 301 by the end of the 
junior year. These students should consult with both their advisor and the Office of Health Professions Advising 
about course planning. More information about study abroad and premed planning, as well as options for dual 
majors in electrical and computer engineering, civil engineering, and mechanical engineering, can be found in the 
BME Undergraduate Program Handbook (available at https://bme.duke.edu/undergrad/curriculum).

Civil and Environmental Engineering
Professor Wiesner, Chair; Professor of the Practice Schaad, Associate Chair; Professor of the Practice Nadeau, 
Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Aquino, Barros, Bergin, Deshusses, Di Giulio, Dolbow, Doyle, 
Gavin, Hinton, Hueckel, Kasibhatla, Katul, Knio, Mann, Oren, Petroski, Richardson, Vengosh, Virgin, and Wi-
esner; Associate Professors Boadu, Borsuk, Ferguson, Gunsch, Hench, Hsu-Kim, Kabala, Li, Meyer, Scovazzi, and 
Stapleton; Assistant Professors Bragg, Carlson, Guilleminot, Hunt, Jeuland, Kumar, and Veveakis; Professors 
Emeriti Haff, Medina, and Muga; Associate Professor Emeritus Peirce; Professors of the Practice Nadeau and 
Schaad; Associate Professor of the Practice Golden; Adjunct Professors Bottero, Germano, Hofmann, Kees, Porp-
orato, Thornton, and Vallero; Adjunct Associate Professors Brasier and Rose; Adjunct Assistant Professor Auffan; 
Lecturer Saucedo

Two majors are available in this department: civil engineering (CE) and environmental engineering (EnvE). 
Both the civil engineering degree program and the environmental engineering degree program are accredited by 
the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET.4The environmental engineering degree program, launched 
in Fall 2013, is highly interdisciplinary and brings together topics as diverse as chemistry, the life sciences, 
economics, fluid mechanics, and public health engineering. The degree responds to the needs of students looking 
for such an interdisciplinary engineering degree that prepares them to work as environmental engineers, graduate 
work in environmental engineering, or for advanced study in environmental law, medicine, public health, or 
global sanitation.

The infrastructure that makes up what we refer to as civilization is, for the most part, the work of civil 
and environmental engineers. Improving, or even maintaining, the quality of life is ever more challenging as 
urban problems in the industrialized nations of the world intensify, while rapid urbanization in many developing 
countries creates other opportunities and obligations for the civil and environmental engineer. The planning, 
design, construction, and maintenance of necessary facilities, in an era of increasingly scarce monetary and other 
resources, demand civil and environmental engineers dedicated to work for the public good and prepared to seek 
more efficient and effective solutions based on current technology. The challenges faced by civil and environmental 
4  Accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, https://www.abet.org.

https://bme.duke.edu/undergrad/curriculum
https://bme.duke.edu/undergrad/curriculum
https://www.abet.org


 Biomedical Engineering (BME)828

engineers vary widely in nature, size, and scope, and encompass both the public and private sectors. Examples 
include high-rise buildings and long-span bridges; concert halls and museums; hazardous waste disposal facilities; 
orbital structures; water supply and treatment facilities; tunnels; dams; seaports, airports, and offshore structures. 
The mission of the undergraduate program in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering at Duke 
University is to provide an education that prepares graduates to solve technical problems, to pursue lifelong 
learning in their field, to assume leadership roles in their chosen careers, and to recognize their professional and 
personal obligations to the broader society and culture. The program is designed to provide a holistic educational 
experience where engineering sciences and design are combined with humanities and social sciences to provide 
the foundation for the critical thinking and skills that allow graduates to enjoy the benefits of a liberal education.

The alumni of the CE and EnvE programs are expected to exhibit the following behaviors:
• conceive, communicate, and contribute to effective and sustainable solutions to professional, multi-

disciplinary challenges (in, for example, engineering design, project management, consulting, finance, 
and academia) by utilizing fundamental principles of mathematics, science, and engineering, and 
employing engineering methods and judgment as needed;

• seek and engage in professional development, including advanced degrees and professional licensure, 
to enhance their capabilities and personal fulfillment;

• be leaders in their professional and personal communities while responding ethically and boldly when 
confronted with modern societal and environmental challenges.

Students may pursue either degree program in civil and environmental engineering coupled with a double 
major in another department at Duke. Examples of recently completed double majors reflect the breadth of 
interests shared by civil and environmental engineering students at Duke; public policy studies, economics, 
French, mathematics, and music. A certificate program in architectural engineering is also available.

The civil and environmental engineering program is built upon the expertise and experience of the faculty 
and is supported by commensurate laboratory and instructional facilities. The civil and environmental engineering 
professors are committed to providing quality classroom instruction, advising, and laboratory experiences in 
settings that encourage student-faculty as well as student-student interactions. The faculty conducts research 
of national and international consequence, and undergraduates have ample opportunities to be involved in such 
research, through undertaking independent study projects and/or by working as research assistants. The research 
facilities in the department, including laboratory equipment and instrumentation as well as computer resources, 
are comparable to those found in other major universities.

Graduates of the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering are able to select from a wide range 
of career paths. Recent graduates have pursued advanced study in engineering, business, law, and architecture, 
while others have accepted positions with major corporations and federal, state, and local government agencies as 
design engineers and project managers. 

Courses in Civil and Environmental Engineering (CEE)
132L. Engineering the Planet. STS Four broad disciplines within civil and environmental engineering will 
be explored and over-arching experiential projects will apply theory and practice to real-world design problems. 
The course will examine the societal context of these disciplines and their contributions to and impacts on the 
built environment. Specifically, the course will examine air, water, land use, shelter, systems, and energy and 
students will be challenged with issues of economics, social impact, green engineering, sustainable design and 
building practices. Instructor: Schaad. One course.
160L. Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science. QS, STS Examination of engineering 
and the societal context of anthropogenic contributions and impacts to the built environment. Focus on the 
human necessities of air, water, land, and energy and the technological interplays of environmental engineering 
in sustainably meeting human needs. Materials and energy balances applied to environmental engineering 
problems. Water pollution control, applied ecology, air quality management, solid and hazardous waste control, 
and environmental ethics. Instructor: Gunsch or Schaad. One course.
190. Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering. A course on a special topic within the civil 
and environmental engineering department. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
201L. Uncertainty Design and Optimization. Principles of design as a creative and iterative process 
involving problem statements, incomplete information, conservative assumptions, constraining regulations, and 
uncertain operating environments. Parameterization of costs and constraints and formulation of constrained 



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 829

optimization problems. Analytical and numerical solutions to constrained optimization problems. Evaluation 
of design solutions via sensitivity and risk analysis. Application to design problems in civil and environmental 
engineering. Prerequisite: Engineering 201L. Instructor: Borsuk, Gavin. One course.
205. Practical Methods in Civil Engineering. Introduction to the practical methods used by Civil 
Engineers, including surveying, computer-aided-design, geographical information systems, and use of the mills, 
lathes, and other machine tools. Instructor: Schaad. Half course.
290. Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering. A course on a special topic within the civil 
and environmental engineering department. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
291. Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. Study arranged on a special topic by 
an instructor with related interests and expertise. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
292. Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. Study arranged on a special topic by 
an instructor with related interests and expertise. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
293. Research Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. R Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. Course may be taken by students who have 
demonstrated aptitude for independent work. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
294. Research Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. R Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. Course may be taken by students who have 
demonstrated aptitude for independent work. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
301L. Fluid Mechanics. Physical properties of fluids; fluid-flow concepts and basic equations; continuity, 
energy, and momentum principles; dimensional analysis and dynamic similitude; viscous effects; applications 
emphasizing real fluids. Selected laboratory work. Corequisites: Engineering 244L and Mathematics 353. 
Instructor: Barros, Bragg, Kabala. One course.
302L. Introduction to Soil Mechanics. Origin and composition of soils, soil structure. Flow of water 
through soils. Environmental geotechnology: land waste disposal, waste containment, and remediation 
technologies. Soil behavior under stress; compressibility, shear strength. Elements of mechanics of soil masses 
with application to problems of bearing capacity of foundations, earth pressure on retaining walls, and stability 
of slopes. Laboratory included. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 301L. Instructor: Boadu, 
Hueckel, Veveakis. One course.
311. Architectural Engineering I. ALP, STS Analysis of the building through the study of its subsystems 
(enclosure, space, structural, environmental-control). Building materials and their principal uses in the 
enclosure and structural subsystems. Computer aided design. Field trips. Prerequisite: junior or senior standing, 
consent of instructor for nonengineering students. Instructor: Brasier. One course.
315-20. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Structural Focus. QS, 
STS Design and testing of solutions to complex interdisciplinary design products in a service-learning context 
with a focus on structural products. Technical design principles; sustainable and engineering best practices; 
prototype formation, testing and evaluation; and establishment of research and analysis methodologies in a 
community-based research experience. Working in partnership with a community agency (local, national, or 
international) and participation in an experimental learning process by engineering a design solution for an 
identified community need. Evaluation focused on design deliverables, fabricated prototypes and a critical 
reflection of the experimental learning process. Instructor: Schaad. One course. C-L: Environment 365-20, 
Public Policy 211-20, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 315-20
315-60. Engineering Sustainable Design and the Global Community: Environmental Focus. QS, 
STS Design and testing of solutions to complex interdisciplinary design products in a service-learning context 
with a focus on structural products. Technical design principles; sustainable and engineering best practices; 
prototype formation, testing and evaluation; and establishment of research and analysis methodologies in a 
community-based research experience. Working in partnership with a community agency (local, national, or 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)830

international) and participation in an experimental learning process by engineering a design solution for an 
identified community need. Evaluation focused on design deliverables, fabricated prototypes and a critical 
reflection of the experimental learning process. Prerequisite: Engineering 201L or Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 110L or consent of instructor. Instructor: Schaad. One course. C-L: Environment 365-60, Public 
Policy 211-60, Human Rights Program-Franklin Humanities Institute 315-60
365. Hydrologic and Environmental Data Analysis. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean 
Sciences 322; also C-L: Environment 322
393. Research Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. R Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. Course may be taken by junior and senior 
students who have demonstrated aptitude for independent work. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
394. Research Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. R Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. Course may be taken by junior and senior 
students who have demonstrated aptitude for independent work. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
411. Architectural Engineering II. ALP, STS Design and integration of building subsystems (enclosure, 
space, structural, environmental-control) in the design of a medium-sized building. Prerequisite: Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 311 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Brasier. One course.
421L. Matrix Structural Analysis. Development of stiffness matrix methods from first principles. 
Superposition of loads and elements. Linear analysis by hand and computer of plane and space structures 
comprising one-dimensional truss and beam elements. Prerequisites: Engineering 201L and Mathematics 216. 
Instructors: Aquino, Gavin, Guilleminot, Scovazzi, or Virgin. One course.
422L. Concrete and Composite Structures. Properties and design of concrete. Analysis and design of 
selected reinforced concrete structural elements according to strength design methodology. Mechanics forming 
the foundation of the methodology is featured. Laboratory work on properties of aggregates, concrete, and 
reinforced concrete. Prerequisite: Engineering 201L. Instructor: Nadeau. One course.
423L. Metallic Structures. Design of tension, compression, and flexural members. Bolted and welded 
connections. Design by LRFD methodology. Selected laboratory work. Prerequisite: Engineering 201L. 
Instructor: Nadeau. One course.
429. Integrated Structural Design. Student design teams complete a preliminary design of an actual 
structural engineering project and present the design to a panel of civil engineering faculty and practitioners. A 
written technical report is required. Topics to be addressed include: the design process; cost estimation; legal, 
ethical, and social aspects of professional engineering practice; short-term and long-term design serviceability 
considerations. Open only to civil engineering students during their final two semesters. Prerequisites: Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 421L, 422L, and 423L. Instructor: Nadeau. One course.
461L. Environmental Aquatic Chemistry. Principles of chemical equilibria and kinetics as applied 
in environmental engineering and science processes. Topics include acid-base equilibrium, the carbonate 
system, metal complexation, oxidation/reduction reactions, mineral phase solubility and surface sorption. 
Applied environmental systems include water treatment, soil remediation, air pollution and green engineering. 
Laboratory included. Prerequisite: Chemistry 20 or 21 or 101DL or 110DL or 201DL. Instructor: Ferguson, Hsu-
Kim. One course. C-L: Energy and the Environment
462L. Applied Biological Principles and Processes in Environmental Engineering. Fundamentals 
of microbiology as it relates to biological environmental engineering processes. Topics include microbial 
metabolism, microbial kinetics and stoichiometry, and bioreactor models. Applications include unit processes in 
wastewater treatment, bioremediation, bioreactors, waste to bioenergy. Laboratory included. Recommended for 
juniors and above. Instructor: Deshusses, Gunsch. One course. C-L: Energy and the Environment
463L. Water Resources Engineering. Descriptive and quantitative hydrology, hydraulics of pressure 
conduits and measurement of flow, compound pipe systems, analysis of flow in pressure distribution systems, 
open channel flow, reservoirs and distribution system storage. Groundwater hydrology and well-hydraulics. 
Probability and statistics in water resources. Selected laboratory and field exercises, computer applications. 



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 831

Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 301L. Instructor: Barros, Kabala, Schaad. One course.
469. Integrated Environmental Design. Student design teams complete a preliminary design of an 
actual environmental engineering project and present the design to a panel of civil engineering faculty and 
practitioners. A written technical report is required. Topics to be addressed include: the design process; cost 
estimation; legal, ethical, and social aspects of professional engineering practice; short-term and long-term 
design serviceability considerations. Open only to civil engineering students during their final two semesters. 
Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 461L, 462L, and 463L. Instructor: Schaad. One course. C-L: 
Global Health
490. Special Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering. A course on a special topic within the 
civil and environmental engineering department. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
491. Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. Study arranged on a special topic by 
an instructor with related interests and expertise. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
492. Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. Study arranged on a special topic by 
an instructor with related interests and expertise. Consent of instructor and director of undergraduate studies 
required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
493. Research Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. R Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. Course may be taken by junior and senior 
students who have demonstrated aptitude for independent work. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
494. Research Independent Study in Civil and Environmental Engineering. R Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. Course may be taken by junior and senior 
students who have demonstrated aptitude for independent work. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Half course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
501. Applied Mathematics for Engineers. Advanced analytical methods of applied mathematics useful 
in solving a wide spectrum of engineering problems. Applications of linear algebra, calculus of variations, the 
Frobenius method, ordinary differential equations, partial differential equations, and boundary value problems. 
Prerequisites: Mathematics 353 or equivalent and undergraduate courses in solid and/or fluid mechanics. 
Instructor: Kabala. One course.
502. Engineering Data Analysis. Introduction to the statistical error analysis of imprecise data and the 
estimation of physical parameters from data with uncertainty. Interpolation and filtering. Data and parameter 
covariance. Emphasis on time series analysis in the time- and frequency-domains. Linear and nonlinear least 
squares. Confidence intervals and belts. Hypothesis testing. Introduction to parameter estimation in linear and 
nonlinear dynamic systems. Prerequisite: graduate standing or instructor consent. Instructors: Boadu, Gavin. 
One course.
511. Construction Management. This course is a broad overview of the roles and responsibilities of the 
construction management engineer. Included in this is an examination of: Project Management Planning, Cost 
Management, Time Management, Quality Management, Contract Administration, and Safety Management. 
Topics covered will include: defining the responsibilities and management structure of the project management 
team, organizing and leading by implementing project controls, defining roles and responsibilities and 
developing communication protocols, and identifying elements of project design and construction likely to give 
rise to disputes and claims. Field trips. Instructor: Schaad. One course.
520. Continuum Mechanics. Tensor fields and index notation. Analysis of states of stress and strain. 
Conservation laws and field equations. Constitutive equations for elastic, viscoelastic, and elastic-plastic solids. 
Formulation and solution of simple problems in elasticity, viscoelasticity, and plasticity. Instructors: Hueckel or 
Nadeau. One course.
521. Elasticity (GE, BB). Linear elasticity will be emphasized including concepts of stress and strain 
as second order tensors, equilibrium at the boundary and within the body, and compatibility of strains. 
Generalized solutions to two and three dimensional problems will be derived and applied to classical problems 
including torsion of noncircular sections, bending of curved beams, stress concentrations and contact problems. 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)832

Applications of elasticity solutions to contemporary problem in civil and biomedical engineering will be 
discussed. Prerequisites: Engineering 201L; Mathematics 353. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Biomedical 
Engineering 526
525. Wave Propagation in Elastic and Poroelastic Media. Basic theory, methods of solution, and 
applications involving wave propagation in elastic and poroelastic media. Analytical and numerical solution of 
corresponding equations of motion. Linear elasticity and viscoelasticity as applied to porous media. Effective 
medium, soil/rock materials as composite materials. Gassmann’s equations and Biot’s theory for poroelastic 
media. Stiffness and damping characteristics of poroelastic materials. Review of engineering applications 
that include NDT, geotechnical and geophysical case histories. Prerequisite: Mathematics 353 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Boadu. One course.
530. Introduction to the Finite Element Method. Investigation of the finite element method as a 
numerical technique for solving linear ordinary and partial differential equations, using rod and beam theory, 
heat conduction, elastostatics and dynamics, and advective/diffusive transport as sample systems. Emphasis 
placed on formulation and programming of finite element models, along with critical evaluation of results. 
Topics include: Galerkin and weighted residual approaches, virtual work principles, discretization, element 
design and evaluation, mixed formulations, and transient analysis. Prerequisites: a working knowledge of 
ordinary and partial differential equations, numerical methods, and programming in FORTRAN or MATLAB. 
Instructor: Aquino, Dolbow, or Scovazzi. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 524
531. Finite Element Methods for Problems in Fluid Mechanics. An extensive introduction to finite 
element methods for fluid flow problems, covering methods for general transport problems, the compressible 
Euler and Navier-Stokes equations, the incompressible Navier-Stokes equations, and subsurface flows in porous 
media. Knowledge on the foundations of numerical analysis and finite elements (i.e., structural mechanics or 
thermal transfer problems) is advisable but not a prerequisite. Taking this course in conjunction with CEE 530 
(254) “Introduction to the Finite Element Method”, CEE 630 (255) “Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis”, or 
CEE 635 (256) “Computational Methods for Evolving Discontinuities” should also be considered by students. 
Instructor: Scovazzi. One course.
535. Engineering Analysis and Computational Mechanics. Mathematical formulation and numerical 
analysis of engineering systems with emphasis on applied mechanics. Equilibrium and eigenvalue problems 
of discrete and distributed systems; properties of these problems and discretization of distributed systems in 
continua by the trial functions with undetermined parameters. The use of weighted residual methods, finite 
elements, and finite differences. Prerequisite: senior or graduate standing. Instructor: Dolbow. One course.
541. Structural Dynamics. Formulation of dynamic models for discrete and continuous structures; normal 
mode analysis, deterministic and stochastic responses to shocks and environmental loading (earthquakes, 
winds, and waves); introduction to nonlinear dynamic systems, analysis and stability of structural components 
(beams and cables and large systems such as offshore towers, moored ships, and floating platforms). Instructor: 
Gavin. One course.
551. Isotopes in Earth and Environmental Sciences. NS, QS, STS One course. C-L: see Earth and 
Ocean Sciences 571; also C-L: Environment 570
560. Environmental Transport Phenomena. Principles of mathematical modeling of environmental 
systems. Mass balances, ideal reactor models for lakes, rivers, atmospheric systems, and population dynamics. 
Derivation of Navier-Stokes equations, advective diffusion equation, mass transfer and fluid dynamics. 
Conservation principles in the atmosphere and bodies of water, fundamental equations for transport in the 
atmosphere and bodies of water, scaling principles, simplification, turbulence, turbulent transport and boundary 
layers. Instructor: Wiesner. One course.
561L. Environmental Aquatic Chemistry. Principles of chemical equilibria and kinetics as applied 
in environmental engineering and science processes. Topics include acid-base equilibrium, the carbonate 
system, metal complexation, oxidation/reduction reactions, mineral phase solubility and surface sorption. 
Applied environmental systems include water treatment, soil remediation, air pollution and green engineering. 
Graduate-level requirements include specific laboratory work and written assignments. Open to graduate 
students; instructor consent required for undergraduates. Not open to students who have taken CEE 461L. 
Instructor: Ferguson, Hsu-Kim. One course. C-L: Environment 542L



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 833

562L. Applied Biological Principles and Processes in Environmental Engineering. Fundamentals 
of microbiology as it relates to biological environmental engineering processes. Topics include microbial 
metabolism, microbial kinetics and stoichiometry, and bioreactor models. Applications include unit processes 
in wastewater treatment, bioremediation, bioreactors, waste to bioenergy. Laboratory included. Graduate-level 
requirements include a term paper and/or a project. Open to graduate students; instructor consent required for 
undergraduates. Not open to students who have taken CEE 462L. Instructor: Deshusses, Gunsch. One course.
563. Chemical Fate of Organic Compounds. One course. C-L: see Environment 540
564. Physical Chemical Processes in Environmental Engineering. Theory and design of fundamental 
and alternative physical and chemical treatment processes for pollution remediation. Reactor kinetics and 
hydraulics, gas transfer, adsorption, sedimentation, precipitation, coagulation/flocculation, chemical oxidation, 
disinfection. Prerequisites: introductory environmental engineering, chemistry, graduate standing, or 
permission of instructor. Instructor: Wiesner. One course.
565. Environmental Analytical Chemistry. This course covers the fundamentals and applications of 
analytical chemistry as applied to detection, identification, and quantification of anthropogenic contaminants 
in environmental samples including air, water, soil, sediment, and biota. The topics include both sample 
preparation methods (i.e. wet chemistry) and instrumental analysis (e.g. mass spectrometry, chromatography, 
and optical spectroscopy). Particular emphasis is placed on current advancements in measurement science 
as applied to environmental chemistry. The material includes both theoretical and practical aspects of 
environmental analysis. Prerequisite: CHEM 131 or CHEM 151L or consent of instructor. Instructor: Ferguson. 
One course. C-L: Environment 566
566. Environmental Microbiology. Fundamentals of microbiology and biochemistry as they apply to 
environmental engineering. General topics include cell chemistry, microbial metabolism, bioenergetics, 
microbial ecology and pollutant biodegradation. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 462L or 
graduate standing or consent of the instructor. Instructor: Gunsch. One course.
569. Introduction to Atmospheric Aerosol. Atmospheric aerosol and its relationship to problems 
in air control, atmospheric science, environmental engineering, and industrial hygiene. Open to advanced 
undergraduate and graduate students. Prerequisites: knowledge of calculus and college-level physics. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
571. Control of Hazardous and Toxic Waste. Engineering solutions to industrial and municipal hazardous 
waste problems. Handling, transportation, storage, and disposal technologies. Biological, chemical, and physical 
processes. Upgrading abandoned disposal sites. Economic and regulatory aspects. Case studies. Consent of 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
574. Remote Sensing in Coastal Environments. NS, QS One course. C-L: see Earth and Ocean Sciences 
530; also C-L: Environment 530
575. Air Pollution Control Engineering. The problems of air pollution with reference to public health and 
environmental effects. Measurement and meteorology. Air pollution control engineering: mechanical, chemical, 
and biological processes and technologies. Instructor: Staff. One course.
576L. Aerosol Measurement Techniques for Air Quality Monitoring and Research. Principles of 
measurements and analysis of ambient particulate matter (aerosol). Traditional and emerging measurements 
techniques currently used in air quality monitoring and homeland defense. Open to advanced undergraduate 
and graduate students interested in the science and engineering related to atmospheric aerosol. Consent of the 
instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
581. Pollutant Transport Systems. Distribution of pollutants in natural waters and the atmosphere; 
diffusive and advective transport phenomena within the natural environment and through artificial conduits and 
storage/treatment systems. Analytical and numerical prediction methods. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 301L and Mathematics 353, or equivalents. Instructor: Staff. One course.
585. Vadose Zone Hydrology. Transport of fluids, heat, and contaminants through unsaturated porous 
media. Understanding the physical laws and mathematical modeling of relevant processes. Field and laboratory 
measurements of moisture content and matric potential. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 
301L and Mathematics 353, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Kabala. One course.



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)834

621. Plasticity. Inelastic behavior of soils and engineering materials. Yield criteria. Flow rules. Concepts of 
perfect plasticity and plastic hardening. Methods of rigid-plasticity. Limit analysis. Isotropic and kinematic 
hardening. Plastic softening. Diffused damage. Thermo-plasticity. Visco-plasticity. Prerequisite: Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 520 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Hueckel. One course.
622. Fracture Mechanics. Theoretical concepts concerning the fracture and failure of brittle and ductile 
materials. Orowan and Griffith approaches to strength. Determination of stress intensity factors using 
compliance method, weight function method, and numerical methods with conservation laws. Cohesive zone 
models, fracture toughness, crack growth stability, and plasticity. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 520, or instructor consent. Instructor: Dolbow. One course.
623. Mechanics of Composite Materials. Theory and application of effective medium, or homogenization, 
theories to predict macroscopic properties of composite materials based on microstructural characterizations. 
Effective elasticity, thermal expansion, moisture swelling, and transport properties, among others, are presented 
along with associated bounds such as Voigt/Reuss and Hashin-Shtrikman. Specific theories include Eshelby, 
Mori-Tanaka, Kuster-Toksoz, self-consistent, generalized self-consistent, differential method, and composite 
sphere and cylinder assemblages. Tensor-to-matrix mappings, orientational averaging, and texture analysis. 
Composite laminated plates, environmentally induced stresses, and failure theories. Prerequisite: Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 520 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Nadeau. One course.
625. Intermediate Dynamics: Dynamics of Very High Dimensional Systems. One course. C-L: see 
Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 541
626. Energy Flow and Wave Propagation in Elastic Solids. Derivation of equations for wave motion 
in simple structural shapes: strings, longitudinal rods, beams and membranes, plates and shells. Solution 
techniques, analysis of systems behavior. Topics covered include: nondispersive and dispersive waves, multiple 
wave types (dilational, distortion), group velocity, impedance concepts including driving point impedances and 
moment impedances. Power and energy for different cases of wave propagation. Prerequisites: Engineering 
244L and Mathematics 353 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Franzoni. One course. C-L: Mechanical 
Engineering and Materials Science 543
627. Linear System Theory. Construction of continuous and discrete-time state space models for 
engineering systems, and linearization of nonlinear models. Applications of linear operator theory to system 
analysis. Dynamics of continuous and discrete-time linear state space systems, including time-varying systems. 
Lyapunov stability theory. Realization theory, including notion of controllability and observability, canonical 
forms, minimal realizations, and balanced realizations. Design of linear feedback controllers and dynamic 
observers, featuring both pole placement and linear quadratic techniques. Introduction to stochastic control and 
filtering. Prerequisites: Electrical and Computer Engineering 382 or Mecahnical Engineering 344, or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 627
628. Stochastic Systems. Analysis of continuous and discrete-time stochastic processes, with emphasis 
on application to mechanics. Time-and frequency-domain analysis of stationary linear stochastic systems. 
Optimal filtering and control of stochastic systems. Continuous-time Poisson counters and Wiener processes. 
Introduction to stochastic (Ito) calculus. Continuous-time nonlinear and nonstationary stochastic processes, and 
the Fokker-Plank equations. Failure analysis and first-passage reliability analysis for continuous-time dynamic 
systems. Introduction to approximate analysis of nonlinear stochastic systems. Prerequisites: Statistical Science 
130 and Civil and Environmental Engineering 627. Instructor: Staff. One course.
629. System Identification. Numerical linear algebra for modeling and filtering data (FFT, SVD, QR, 
and PCA); ordinary least squares, total least squares, and recursive least squares; measurement noise and 
propagation of measurement error; regularization; optimal linear filtering; state-space models, eigensystem 
realization, deterministic and stochastic subspace identification through projections and canonical correlation. 
Applications drawn from engineering, natural sciences, and finance. Instructor: Gavin. One course.
630. Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis. Formulation and solution of nonlinear initial/boundary value 
problems using the finite element method. Systems include nonlinear heat conduction/diffusion, geometrically 
nonlinear solid and structural mechanics applications, and materially nonlinear systems (for example, 
elastoplasticity). Emphasis on development of variational principles for nonlinear problems, finite element 
discretization, and equation-solving strategies for discrete nonlinear equation systems. Topics include: Newton-
Raphson techniques, quasi-Newton iteration schemes, solution of nonlinear transient problems, and treatment 



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 835

of constraints in a nonlinear framework. An independent project, proposed by the student, is required. 
Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 530/Mechanical Engineering 524, or consent of instructor. 
Instructors: Aquino, Dolbow, or Scovazzi. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 525
635. Computational Methods for Evolving Discontinuities. Presents an overview of advanced 
numerical methods for the treatment of engineering problems such as brittle and ductile failure and solid-liquid 
phase transformations in pure substances. Analytical methods for arbitrary discontinuities and interfaces are 
reviewed, with particular attention to the derivation of jump conditions. Partition of unity and level set methods. 
Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 530, or 630, or instructor consent. Instructor: Dolbow. One 
course.
641. Advanced Soil Mechanics. Characterization of behavior of geomaterials. Stress-strain incremental 
laws. Nonlinear elasticity, hypo-elasticity, plasticity and visco-plasticity of geomaterials; approximated laws 
of soil mechanics; fluid-saturated soil behavior; cyclic behavior of soils; liquefaction and cyclic mobility; 
elements of soil dynamics; thermal effects on soils. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 302L or 
equivalent. Instructor: Hueckel. One course.
642. Environmental Geomechanics. The course addresses engineered and natural situations, where 
mechanical and hydraulic properties of soils and rocks depend on environmental (thermal chemical, biological) 
processes. Experimental findings are reviewed, and modeling of coupled thermo-mechanical, chemo-mechanical 
technologies are reviewed. Instructor: Hueckel. One course.
643. Environmental and Engineering Geophysics. Use of geophysical methods for solving engineering 
and environmental problems. Theoretical frameworks, techniques, and relevant case histories as applied to 
engineering and environmental problems (including groundwater evaluation and protection, siting of landfills, 
chemical waste disposals, roads assessments, foundations investigations for structures, liquefaction and 
earthquake risk assessment). Introduction to theory of elasticity and wave propagation in elastic and poroelastic 
media, electrical and electromagnetic methods, and ground penetrating radar technology. Prerequisite: 
Mathematics 353 or Physics 152L, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Boadu. One course.
644. Inverse Problems in Geosciences and Engineering. Basic concepts, theory, methods of 
solution, and application of inverse problems in engineering, groundwater modeling, and applied geophysics. 
Deterministic and statistical frameworks for solving inverse problems. Strategies for solving linear and 
nonlinear inverse problems. Bayesian approach to nonlinear inverse problems. Emphasis on the ill-posed 
problem of inverse solutions. Data collection strategies in relation to solution of inverse problems. Model 
structure identification and parameter estimation procedures. Prerequisite: Mathematics 353 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Boadu. One course.
645. Experimental Systems. Formulation of experiments; Pi theorem and principles of similitude; 
data acquisition systems; static and dynamic measurement of displacement, force, and strain; interfacing 
experiments with digital computers for data storage, analysis, and plotting. Students select, design, perform, and 
interpret laboratory-scale experiments involving structures and basic material behavior. Prerequisite: senior or 
graduate standing in engineering or the physical sciences. Instructor: Gavin. One course.
646. Plates and Shells. Differential equation and extremum formulations of linear equilibrium problems of 
Kirchhoffian and non-Kirchhoffian plates of isotropic and aelotropic material. Solution methods. Differential 
equation formulation of thin aelotropic shell problems in curvilinear coordinates; membrane and bending 
theories; specialization for shallow shells, shells of revolution, and plates. Extremum formulation of shell 
problems. Solution methods. Prerequisites: (Civil and Environmental Engineering 421L or Mechanical 
Engineering 321L) and Mathematics 353. Instructor: Virgin. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and 
Materials Science 626
647. Buckling of Engineering Structures. An introduction to the underlying concepts of elastic stability 
and buckling, development of differential equation and energy approaches, buckling of common engineering 
components including link models, struts, frames, plates, and shells. Consideration will also be given to inelastic 
behavior, postbuckling, and design implications. Instructor: Virgin. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering 
and Materials Science 527
648. Multivariable Control. Synthesis and analysis of multivariable linear dynamic feedback compensators. 
Standard problem formulation. Performance norms. Full state feedback and linear quadratic Gaussian 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)836

synthesis. Lyapunov and Riccati equations. Passivity, positivity, and self-dual realizations. Nominal performance 
and robust stability. Applications to vibration control, noise suppression, tracking, and guidance. Prerequisite: 
a course in linear systems and classical control, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Bushnell, Clark, or Gavin. 
One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 548
649. Structural Engineering Project Management. Apply project management tools and skills to a 
structural engineering design project. Implement changes in schedule, budget, and changing client and/or 
regulatory climate. Work with a design team of undergraduate students. Prerequisites: not open to students who 
have had Civil and Environmental Engineering 429, 469, or 679. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: 
Nadeau. One course.
661L. Environmental Molecular Biotechnology (GE, MC). Principles of genetics and recombinant DNA 
for environmental systems. Applications to include genetic engineering for bioremediation, DGGE, FISH, micro-
arrays and biosensors. Laboratory exercises to include DNA isolation, amplification, manipulation and analysis. 
Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 462L, Biology 20, Biology 201L, or graduate standing, or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Gunsch. One course. C-L: Biomedical Engineering 565L
662. Physico-Bio-Chemical Transformations. Surveys of a selection of topics related to the interaction 
between fluid flow (through channels or the porous media) and physical, chemical, and biochemical 
transformations encountered in environmental engineering. Numerous diverse phenomena, including solute 
transport in the vicinity of chemically reacting surfaces, reverse osmosis, sedimentation, centrifugation, 
ultrafiltration, rheology, microorganism population dynamics, and others will be presented in a unifying 
mathematical framework. Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 301L and Mathematics 353, or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Kabala. One course.
666. Aquatic Geochemistry. Geochemistry of the water-solid interface of soils, minerals, and particles in 
earth systems. Topics will cover the chemical composition of soils, geochemical specalation, mineral weathering 
and stability, sorption and ion exchange, soil redox processes, and chemical kinetics at environmental surfaces. 
Prerequisites: CEE 461L or CEE 561L/ENVIRON 542L or permission of instructor. Instructor: Hsu-Kim. One 
course. C-L: Environment 666
667. Chemical Transformation of Environmental Contaminants. Mechanisms and principles 
underlying organic contaminant transformations in the ambient environment. Topics include hydrolysis, 
oxidation/reduction, direct and indirect photolysis, and reactions with disinfectant chemicals. Reactions will 
be considered in context of both natural (e.g. surface water and cloudwater) and engineered (e.g. drinking 
water, wastewater, and groundwater remediation) systems. Approaches will include both qualitative (reaction 
mechanism and product identification) as well as quantitative (reaction kinetics and stoichiometry) aspects of 
environmental reaction chemistry. Prerequisites: CEE 563/ENVIRON 540 or one semester of organic chemistry. 
Instructor: Ferguson. One course. C-L: Environment 667
671. Physicochemical Unit Operations in Water Treatment. Fundamental bases for design of water and 
waste treatment systems, including transport, mixing, sedimentation and filtration, gas transfer, coagulation, 
and absorption processes. Emphasis on physical and chemical treatment combinations for drinking water 
supply. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 462L. Instructor: Kabala. One course.
672. Solid Waste Engineering. Engineering design of material and energy recovery systems including 
traditional and advanced technologies. Sanitary landfills and incineration of solid wastes. Application of systems 
analysis to collection of municipal refuse. Major design project in solid waste management. Prerequisite: Civil 
and Environmental Engineering 462L, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Environment 
548
675. Introduction to the Physical Principles of Remote Sensing of the Environment. The course 
provides an overview of the radiative transfer principles used in remote-sensing across the electromagnetic 
spectrum using both passive and active sensors. Special focus is placed on the process that leads from theory 
to the development of retrieval algorithms for satellite-based sensors, including post-processing of raw 
observations and uncertainty analysis. Students carry on three hands-on projects (Visible and Thermal Infrared, 
Active Microwave, and Passive Microwave). Background in at least one of the following disciplines is desirable: 
radiation transfer, signal processing, and environmental physics (Hydrology, Geology, Geophysics, Plant 
Biophysics, Soil Physics). Instructor consent required. Instructor: Barros. One course.



Biomedical Engineering (BME) 837

676. Fundamentals and Applications of UV Processes in Environmental Systems. Ultraviolet light 
based processes as they relate to treatment of contaminants in water and air. Concepts in photochemistry and 
photobiology, fluence determination, UV disinfection, photodegradation processes for chemical containments, 
advanced oxidation processes, mathematical modeling and design of UV systems. Includes laboratory exercises. 
Prerequisites: Civil and Environmental Engineering 564, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
679. Environmental Engineering Project Management. Apply project management tools and skills 
to an environmental engineering design project. Implement changes in schedule, budget, and changing client 
and/or regulatory climate. Work with a design team of undergraduate students. Consent of instructor required. 
Prerequisites: not open to students who have had Civil and Environmental Engineering 429, 469, or 649. 
Instructor: Schaad. One course.
681. Analytical Models of Subsurface Hydrology. Reviews the method of separation of variables, surveys 
integral transforms, and illustrates their application to solving initial boundary value problems. Three parts 
include: mathematical and hydrologic fundamentals, integral transforms and their philosophy, and detailed 
derivation via integral transforms of some of the most commonly used models in subsurface hydrology and 
environmental engineering. Discussion and use of parameter estimation techniques associated with the 
considered models. Prerequisite: Mathematics 353 and (Civil and Environmental Engineering 301L or 463L), or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Kabala. One course.
682. Dynamic Engineering Hydrology. Dynamics of the occurrence, circulation, and distribution of 
water; climate, hydrometeorology, geophysical fluid motions. Precipitation, surface runoff and stream flow, 
infiltration, water losses. Hydrograph analysis, catchment characteristics, hydrologic instrumentation, and 
computer simulation models. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 301L, or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
683. Groundwater Hydrology and Contaminant Transport. Review of surface hydrology and its 
interaction with groundwater. The nature of porous media, hydraulic conductivity, and permeability. General 
hydrodynamic equations of flow in isotropic and anisotropic media. Water quality standards and contaminant 
transport processes: advective-dispersive equation for solute transport in saturated porous media. Analytical 
and numerical methods, selected computer applications. Deterministic versus stochastic models. Applications: 
leachate from sanitary landfills, industrial lagoons and ponds, subsurface wastewater injection, monitoring of 
groundwater contamination. Conjunctive surface-subsurface models. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 301L, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Kabala. One course.
684. Physical Hydrology and Hydrometeorology. The objective of this course is to introduce and 
familiarize graduate students with the fundamental physical processes in Hydrology and Hydrometeorology 
that control and modulate the pathways and transformations of water in the environment. The content of the 
course will be strongly oriented toward providing students with a specific basis for quantitative analysis of the 
terrestrial water cycle including land-atmosphere interactions and clouds and precipitation (rain and snow) 
processes. The course should be of interest to undergraduate and graduate students interested in Environmental 
Science and Engineering, and Atmospheric and Earth Sciences. Instructor: Barros. One course.
685. Water Supply Engineering Design. The study of water resources and municipal water requirements 
including reservoirs, transmission, treatment and distribution systems; methods of collection, treatment, and 
disposal of municipal and industrial wastewaters. The course includes the preparation of a comprehensive 
engineering report encompassing all aspects of municipal water and wastewater systems. Field trips to be 
arranged. Prerequisite: Civil and Environmental Engineering 462L, or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
686. Ecohydrology. This course provides the theoretical basis for understanding the interaction between 
hydrologic cycle, vegetation and soil biogeochemistry which is key for a proper management of water resources 
and terrestrial ecosystems especially in view of the possible intensification and alteration of the hydrologic 
regime due to climate change. Topics include: Probabilistic soil moisture dynamics; plant water stress; coupled 
dynamics of soil moisture, transpiration and photosynthesis; and infiltration, root uptake, and hydrologic 
control on soil biogeochemistry. Instructor: Staff. One course.
688. Turbulence 1. This is an introductory course on the subject of turbulence in fluids. The focus is on 
understanding the fundamental physical processes and mechanisms governing the behavior of turbulent flows. 
The course covers the following—overview of physical and mathematical properties of Navier-Stokes equation; 



 Biomedical Engineering (BME)838

kinematics, dynamics and energetics of turbulent flows; Kolmogorov theories of turbulence; Richardson 
energy cascade; wall-bounded turbulent flows; particle dispersion, clustering and collisions in turbulent flows. 
Prerequisite: ((CEE 301L or ME 336L) and Mathematics 353) or graduate standing. Recommended prerequisite: 
an introductory course on fluid mechanics, and a course on differential equations. Instructor: Bragg. One course. 
C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 634
690. Advanced Topics in Civil and Environmental Engineering. A course on an advanced topic within 
the civil and environmental engineering department. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

The Major

Civil Engineering
Major Requirements. The major requirements for civil engineering (CE) are included in the minimum of 

34.0 course credits listed under general requirements and departmental requirements. 
Meeting the departmental requirements together with the four engineering and applied science courses 

from the general requirements requires that the following courses must be included. All majors must take 
Engineering 101L, 201L, 244L and 305; Civil and Environmental Engineering 132L, 201L, 301L, 302L; and 
Statistical Science 130. All majors must complete at least one concentration: structural engineering and mechanics 
(S/M) or environmental engineering and water resources (E/W). Majors choosing the structural engineering 
and mechanics concentration (S/M) must take Civil and Environmental Engineering 421L, 422L, 423L and 429. 
Majors choosing the environmental engineering and water resources concentration (E/W) must take Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 461L, 462L, 463L and 469. To complete the engineering and applied sciences general 
requirement, all majors must take one of the following (electrical science, information and computer science, 
materials science, thermal science, and transfer processes) courses: Biomedical Engineering 253L, Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 307, 560, 581, Computer Science 201, Electrical and Computer Engineering 110L, 311, 
Engineering 224L, Mechanical Engineering and Material Science 221L, 331L, or Physics 271L (students completing 
the structural engineering and mechanics concentration may take Civil and Environmental Engineering 461L, 
463L, or 462L; students completing the environmental engineering and water resources concentration may take 
Civil and Environmental Engineering 421L, 422L, or 423L). All majors must take two civil and environmental 
engineering electives at the 300 level, or higher. All majors have a total of two unrestricted electives. 

Toward fulfilling the general requirements, the following elective options must be selected from the following 
courses. The natural science requirement is satisfied by completing Biology 201L, 215/215L, 275A, 311, Earth and 
Ocean Sciences 101, 102, 201L, 202, or 370A. At least one of the five courses used to satisfy the humanities and 
social sciences requirement, or an approved alternate course, must possess an ethical inquiry (EI) code.

A sample, semester-by-semester sequencing of the requirements for the major is provided in the CEE 
Undergraduate Handbook, which is available online at https://cee.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/ce-planning. 
Students planning to attend graduate school are strongly advised to use the unrestricted electives to take at least 
one additional civil and environmental engineering elective, with at least one of them at the 500 level or higher.

Environmental Engineering
Major Requirements. The major requirements for environmental engineering (EnvE) are included in the 

minimum of 34.0 course credits listed under general requirements and departmental requirements. 
Meeting the departmental requirements together with the four engineering and applied science courses from 

the general requirements requires that the following courses must be included. All majors must take Engineering 
101L, 201L, and 244L; Civil and Environmental Engineering 132L, 301L, 302L, 461L, 462L, 463L, 469, 560; and 
Statistical Science 130. All majors must take Engineering 305 or Civil and Environmental Engineering 201L. 
All majors must take an approved earth science course. All majors must take an approved thermodynamics 
course. All majors must take two approved upper-level environmental courses. All majors have two unrestricted 
electives. Approved earth science electives are Earth and Ocean Sciences 101, 102, 201L, 202, 315, 323, and Civil 
and Environmental Engineering 666. Approved thermodynamics courses are Mechanical Engineering 331L. 
Approved upper-level environmental electives are Chemistry 201DL, 202L; Civil and Environmental Engineering 
307, 315-60, 563, 564, 565, 566, 667, 575, 661L, 666, 667, 683, 684; Engineering 424L; and Environment 535.

Toward fulfilling the general requirements, the following elective options must be selected from the following 
courses. The natural science requirement is satisfied by completing an approved biology course. Approved Biology 

https://cee.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/ce-planning


Biomedical Engineering (BME) 839

courses are 201L, 202L, and 212L. At least one of the five courses used to satisfy the humanities and social sciences 
requirement, or an approved alternate course, must possess an ethical inquiry (EI) code.

 A sample, semester-by-semester sequencing of the requirements for the major is provided in the CEE 
Undergraduate Handbook, which is available online at https://cee.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/enve-planning.

Electrical and Computer Engineering
Professor Chakrabarty, Chair; Professor of the Practice Huettel, Associate Chair and Director of Undergraduate 
Studies; Professors Brady, A. Brown, Calderbank, Carin, Chakrabarty, Chen, Collins, Cummer, Cummings, Cur-
tarolo, Daubechies, Donald, Fair, Glass, Grill, Izatt, Joines, Jokerst, Kim, Krolik, Lebeck, X. Li, Litchinitser, Liu, 
Lo, Maggs, Massoud, Nolte, Nowacek, Padilla, Pfister, Reif, Rudin, Samei, Sapiro, Smith, Sorin, Stiff-Roberts, 
Tarokh, and Trivedi; Associate Professors Bartesaghi, Board, Brooke, K. Brown, Farsiu, Franklin, Gehm, Lee, 
H. Li, Mazurowski, Mikkelsen, Peterchev, Shen, Yang, and Zavlanos; Assistant Professors Carlson, Goetz, Gong, 
Gorlatova, Heller, Henao, Horstmeyer, Marvian, Pajic, Pearson, Reeves, Wills, and Xu; Professors Emeriti Casey, 
George, Marinos, and Wang; Professor of the Practice Huettel; Associate Professors of the Practice Daily, Gus-
tafson, Hilton, and Tantum; Assistant Professors of the Practice Bletsch, Lipp, and Younes; Research Professor 
Stoner; Associate Research Professors Amsden, Greenberg, Grego, and Marks; Assistant Research Professors Di 
Martino, Fan, Malof, and Q. Qiu; Adjunct Professors Derby, J. Qiu, and Wilson; Adjunct Associate Professor 
Morizio; Adjunct Assistant Professors Fahmy, Goss, Hineman, Hower, Kundtz, Larouche, Liao, Remus, Rogers, 
Urzhumov, and Wang

The educational mission of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering is to graduate 
electrical and computer engineers who embody excellence in a broad sense. We expect our graduates to advance 
within industry positions or in graduate study, or to carry the attributes of an engineering education into other 
disciplines. The electrical and computer engineering program of study must include mathematics and basic 
sciences, fundamentals, and applications in several engineering sciences, and team-based experience in the 
process of design, where theory is applied in the context of real needs and limitations, and where judgment must 
be exercised. Our electrical and computer engineering graduates should be able to think critically when solving 
problems and managing tasks and communicate effectively in multidisciplinary professional environments. To be 
a responsible member of the engineering profession, each graduate must be aware of social, ethical, environmental, 
and economic factors and constraints on engineering activity, and must understand the importance of these 
matters in a global context. We aspire to have our graduates exhibit intellectual depth and creativity, uphold high 
ethical standards, and show a commitment to the betterment of society through service and professional work.

To this end, the specific program educational objectives that we look for in our graduates are that they
• advance professionally in their chosen field;
• contribute to their professional community and to society; and
• engage in lifelong learning in professional and personal endeavors.
The electrical and computer engineering (ECE) program is fully accredited by the Engineering Commission 

of ABET5 and leads to a bachelor of science in engineering (BSE) degree. The ECE curriculum provides a solid 
foundation in mathematics, physical and life sciences, computer science, and humanities and social sciences that 
complements a set of twelve theme-based ECE courses. 

The Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering has designed its curriculum based on the theme 
of integrated sensing and information processing (ISIP). The ISIP theme capitalizes on the collective research 
expertise of the ECE faculty and provides a coherent, overarching framework that links principles of ECE to 
each other and to real-world engineering problems. The cornerstone of the ECE curriculum is the first course 
fundamentals of electrical and computer engineering, which has been designed to provide students with a holistic 
view of ECE by introducing concepts spanning how to interface sensors and systems with the physical world, how 
to transfer/transmit energy/information, and how to extract, manipulate, analyze, and interpret information. 
The integrated design challenge in this first course introduces students to team problem solving and motivates 
in-depth study of ECE concepts in subsequent terms. Each of four follow-on core courses focuses on a specific 
subfield of ECE (digital systems, microelectronics, sensing and waves, signals and systems), and integrates lateral 
and vertical connections to other courses through the use of thematic examples. Following the five core courses 

5 Accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, https://www.abet.org.

https://cee.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/enve-planning
https://www.abet.org


 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)840

are seven ECE technical electives that include a culminating engineering design course where teams of students 
address a significant real-world problem or opportunity.

The ECE curriculum emphasizes creative problem solving through open-ended design challenges in many 
courses. Working in teams, students collaborate to utilize and develop their individual and collective technical, 
management, and leadership skills to design, simulate, build, and test components and systems to meet a set of 
specifications, often defined by industry standards.

Students have the option to pursue two or more areas of concentration, depending on personal interests. 
The upper-level technical electives, which extend the breadth and depth of the ECE core curriculum, provide a 
firm foundation for future technical accomplishment and for effective problem solving in the diverse fields that 
our graduates pursue.

The flexibility of the ECE curriculum enables students and their faculty advisors to tailor a unique educational 
experience for every student. This may include a semester abroad; a second major, minor, or certificate program; 
and/or a research experience with a faculty member. The most popular second majors are computer science and 
biomedical engineering. Other popular second majors include mathematics, economics, and physics. Interests 
such as pre-medicine, pre-law, art, music, psychology, and social sciences can be accommodated through 
individually designed programs. Students are encouraged to take more than the minimum required courses in the 
sciences and the liberal arts, as is fitting at an engineering school in a university with a strong liberal arts tradition.

Courses in Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)
110L. Fundamentals of Electrical and Computer Engineering. Students learn core ECE concepts, 
providing a foundation on which subsequent courses build. Concepts include techniques for analyzing linear 
circuits, semiconductor and photonic devices, frequency representation, filtering, combinational and sequential 
logic. Central to the course is an extensive design challenge that requires students to integrate knowledge 
across topics while honing practical design and project management skills. Course culminates in an exciting 
competition in which teams of robots race to overcome challenging obstacles using sensor data acquisition and 
processing. Prerequisite/corequisite: (Engineering 103L or Computer Science 201) and (Mathematics 112L or 22 
or equivalent). Instructor: Daily, Gustafson, Huettel, Smith, or Tantum. One course.
230L. Introduction to Microelectronic Devices and Circuits. Introduction to semiconductor materials 
and their corresponding electronic devices and circuits. In lab, students will perform photolithography and 
characterize devices and circuits. Lecture will cover: underlying physics of semiconductor materials; operation 
of semiconductor devices, including diodes and transistors (MOSFETs); and application of MOSFETs into 
digital circuits. Students will understand basic operation of semiconductor devices in a way that is foundational 
for the expansive semiconductor industry. Prerequisite: (Engineering 103L or Computer Science 201) and 
(Physics 152L or 26) and (Electrical and Computer Engineering 110L or Biomedical Engineering 253L). 
Instructor: Brown, Franklin, Massoud, Stiff-Roberts. One course.
250D. Computer Architecture. Computer structure, assembly language, instruction execution, addressing 
techniques, and digital representation of data. Computer system organization, logic design, microprogramming, 
cache and memory systems, and input/output interfaces. Prerequisite: Computer Science 201. Instructor: 
Bletsch, Board, Lebeck, Lee, Sorin, or Wills. One course. C-L: Computer Science 250D
270DL. Fields and Waves: Fundamentals of Information Propagation. Introduces the concept of 
fields—a mathematical description of physical quantities that vary from place to place (and potentially from time 
to time)—and explores the mathematical and physical reasons that oscillatory behavior is so ubiquitous across 
engineering and physics. Introduces the mathematical foundations, followed by specific examples in electrical 
circuits, electromagnetic waves, quantum mechanics, and acoustics as well as the connection to Fourier analysis 
methods. Intended to facilitate subsequent study in any area involving wave phenomena, including analog 
and microwave circuits, electromagnetics, optics, and quantum mechanics. Prerequisite: Physics 152L or 26, 
Mathematics 212 or 222, and ECE 110L. Instructor: Brady, Brown, Carin, Cummer, Gehm, Joines, Liu, Padilla, 
or Smith. One course.
280L. Introduction to Signals and Systems. Continuous and discrete signal representation and 
classification; system classification and response; transfer functions. Fourier series; Fourier, Laplace, and z 
transforms. Applications to Integrated Sensing and Information Processing; networks, modulation, sampling, 
filtering, and digital signal processing. Laboratory projects using digital signal processing hardware and 
microcontrollers. Computational solutions of problems using Matlab and Maple. Prerequisite: (Engineering 



Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) 841

103L or Computer Science 201) and (Electrical and Computer Engineering 110L or Biomedical Engineering 
253L). Instructor: Collins, Gustafson, Huettel, or Tarokh. One course.
290. Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Study arranged on a special electrical and 
computer engineering topic in which the faculty has particular interest and competence as a result of research 
and professional activities. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
291. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Project arranged on a special topic by an 
instructor with related interests and expertise. For sophomore students. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
292. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Project arranged on a special topic by an 
instructor with related interests and expertise. For sophomore students. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
311. Thermal Physics. Thermal properties of matter treated using the basic concepts of entropy, temperature, 
chemical potential, partition function, and free energy. Topics include the laws of thermodynamics, ideal 
gases, thermal radiation and electrical noise, heat engines, Fermi-Dirac and Bose-Einstein distributions, 
semiconductor statistics, kinetic theory, and phase transformations. Also taught as Physics 363. Prerequisites: 
Mathematics 212 or equivalent and Physics 51L, 152L or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
330L. Fundamentals of Microelectronic Devices. Fundamentals of semiconductor device physics 
(semiconductor technology, dopants and carrier concentrations, carrier drift and diffusion, semiconductor 
equations, semiconductor device models). Principles of semiconductor device analysis (current-voltage and 
capacitance-voltage characteristics). Static, small-signal, and dynamic operation of semiconductor contacts, 
PN-junction diodes, MOS capacitors, MOS field-effect transistors (MOSFETs), and bipolar-junction transistors 
(BJTs). SPICE models and parameter extraction. Fabrication and electrical characterization of MOS capacitors 
in the Shared Materials Instrumentation Facility (SMIF). Prerequisite: ECE 230L. Instructor: Massoud. One 
course.
331L. Fundamentals of Microelectronic Circuits. Analysis and design of electronic circuits in bipolar 
and MOS technologies, with emphasis on both large-signal and small-signal methods. Circuits for logic gates, 
latches, and memories. Single-stage and multistage amplifiers and op amps. Circuits with feedback, including 
stability and frequency response considerations. Analog and mixed analog/digital circuit applications. Extensive 
use of SPICE for circuit simulation. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 230L. Instructor: 
Brooke, Derby, or Fair. One course.
340L. Optics and Photonics. NS One course. C-L: see Physics 320L; also C-L: Visual and Media Studies 
325L
341L. Solar Cells. A broad overview of solar cells, including solar radiation, device theory, materials options, 
device fabrication and characterization, and system-level issues. Students participate in hands-on laboratory 
exercises related to the fabrication and characterization of organic, photovoltaic solar cells. Prerequisite: Physics 
152L or equivalent. Instructor: Brown or Stiff-Roberts. One course.
350L. Digital Systems. Design and implementation of combinational and sequential digital systems with 
special attention to digital computers. The use of computer-aided design tools, hardware description languages, 
and programmable logic chips to facilitate larger and higher performance designs will be stressed. Laboratory 
exercises and group design projects will reinforce the various design techniques discussed in class. Prerequisite: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 250D or Computer Science 250. Instructor: Board, Hilton, Lee, Sorin, 
Younes. One course. C-L: Computer Science 350L, Information Science + Studies
353. Introduction to Operating Systems. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 310
356. Computer Network Architecture. One course. C-L: see Computer Science 356; also C-L: Information 
Science + Studies
364. Performance and Technology: Composition Workshop. ALP, STS One course. C-L: see Dance 
308; also C-L: Theater Studies 364, Information Science + Studies 376
380. Introduction to Random Signals and Noise. Introduction to probability and random processes 
with example applications to processing data with uncertainty. Probability, conditional probability, discrete 
and continuous random variables, expected values, characteristic functions, multiple random variables. Intro 



 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)842

to random processes, random discrete-time signals, power spectrum, autocorrelation, analysis of linear systems 
driven by wide-sense stationary random processes. Gaussian random processes, band limited white Gaussian 
noise. Intro to binary hypothesis testing, Bayesian signal detection, applications involving uncertain and random 
signals and noise. Can fulfill ECE free elective or ECE stats requirement. Prerequisite: ECE 280L, Mathematics 
212. Instructor: Nolte. One course.
381. Fundamentals of Digital Signal Processing. An introduction to theory and applications of digital 
signal processing. Concepts, analytical tools and design techniques to process signals in digital form. Signal 
sampling and reconstruction, discrete-time transforms including the z-transform, discrete-time Fourier 
transform, and discrete Fourier transform. Discrete systems including the analysis and design of FIR and 
IIR filters. Introduction to applications of digital signal processing such as image processing, and optimal 
detection of signals in noise. Discrete system simulations using MATLAB. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 280L. Instructor: Huettel or Nolte. One course.
382L. Control of Dynamic Systems. One course. C-L: see Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 
344L
383. Introduction to Robotics and Automation. Fundamental notions in robotics, basic configurations of 
manipulator arm design, coordinate transformations, control functions, and robot programming. Applications 
of artificial intelligence, machine vision, force/torque, touch and other sensory subsystems. Design for automatic 
assembly concepts, tools, and techniques. Application of automated and robotic assembly costs, benefits, and 
economic justification. Selected laboratory and programming assignments. Prerequisites: ECE 280L or EGR 
224L. Instructor: Staff. One course. C-L: Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science 442, Information 
Science + Studies
384LA. Sound in the Sea: Introduction to Marine Bioacoustics. NS, R, STS One course. C-L: see 
Environment 280LA; also C-L: Earth and Ocean Sciences 280LA, Biology 279LA, Marine Sciences, Marine 
Science and Conservation
391. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Project arranged on a special topic by an 
instructor with related interests and expertise. For junior students. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
392. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Project arranged on a special topic by an 
instructor with related interests and expertise. For junior students. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
431. Power Electronic Circuits for Energy Conversion. Efficient conversion of electrical energy is critical 
for electric and hybrid vehicles, wind and solar energy, power grids, computers, medical devices, and portables. 
This course teaches analysis and design of power electronic circuits for energy conversion, including circuit 
operation (converter topologies, steady-state modeling, switch realization), converter control (ac modeling, 
small-signal transfer functions, feedback), and magnetics (inductors, transformers). The course shares lectures 
with ECE/Energy Engineering 531, but has fewer assignments. Prerequisite: ECE 230L or Engineering 224L or 
graduate student standing. Not open to students who have taken ECE 531 or Energy Engineering 531. Instructor: 
Peterchev. One course. C-L: Energy Engineering 431
449. Sensors and Sensor Interface Design. Teams design board-level sensing system that achieves stated 
specifications. Analog, digital, wireless, optical, and fluidic components. Resource planning/management, 
project budgeting, study of component specifications and characteristics, vendor interaction, circuit schematic 
design & simulation, board layout, submission to foundry, component solder assembly, system test, comparison 
to design specs. Cost, economic viability, ethical and environmental issues, manufacturability considered. 
Prerequisite: ECE 230, 250D, 270DL, and 280L and (Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Statistical Science 130L 
or Mathematics 230 or ECE 555 or ECE 380 or Statistical Science 240L or EGR 238L or Mathematics 238L or 
Mathematics 340) and (Physics 152L or 26) and (Chemistry 101DL or 20 or 21) and one of (ECE 330L or ECE 
331L or ECE 340L). Instructor: Brooke, Jokerst. One course.
458. Engineering Software for Maintainability. Students will refine their ability to engineer software, 
with a focus on maintainability. Teams complete a large programming project whose requirements undergo 
evolutions during the semester. Prior to each evolution, teams submit not only their code for the current 
requirements, but also a written document analyzing their current design and reflecting on how past design 



Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) 843

choices impacted their most recent work. Teams must consider appropriate engineering standards and 
realistic constraints. Prerequisite: ECE 230L, 250D, 270DL, and 280L and (Computer Science 308 or 307D) 
and (Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Statistical Science 130L or Mathematics 230 or ECE 555 or ECE 380 or 
Statistical Science 240L or EGR 238L or Mathematics 340) and (Physics 152L or 26) and (Chemistry 101DL or 
20 or 21). Instructor: Bletsch or Hilton. One course.
459. Introduction to Embedded Systems. An introduction to hardware/software codesign of embedded 
computer systems. Structured programming techniques for high and low level programs. Hardware interfacing 
strategies for sensors, actuators, and displays. Detailed study of Motorola 68HC11 and 68HC12 microcomputers 
as applied to embedded system development. Hardware and simulation laboratory exercises with 68HC11 
and 68HC12 development boards. Major design project. Prerequisite: ECE 230L and 250D and 270DL and 
280L and (ECE 350L, 331L, or 330L) and (Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Physics 152L or 26) and (Chemistry 
101DL, 20, or 21) and (Statistical Science 130, Mathematics 230, ECE 555, ECE 380, Statistical Science 240L, 
Engineering 238L, or Mathematics 340). Instructor: Board or Pajic. One course.
461. Ocean Engineering. A challenging Ocean Engineering project will be undertaken in this class. Past 
examples include participation in a national XPRIZE contest to build an Ocean Sensor. Students define project 
scope and form task-oriented sub-teams to make significant progress toward overall class project goal. Students 
are expected to spend several hours per week outside of class working on the team projects. Students will need 
to be in teams that can all meet for at least couple of hours at the same time each week. Prerequisite: one of ECE 
230L, ECE 250D, ECE 270DL, ECE 280L, Mechanical Engineering 221L, Engineering 244L, or Environment 
102. Instructor: Brooke, Nowacek. One course. C-L: Environment 461, Mechanical Engineering and Materials 
Science 426
480. Applied Probability for Statistical Learning. This course discusses topics in Bayesian probability 
and its application to foundations of statistical learning. The primary objectives of the course are to provide a 
mathematically rigorous foundation in Bayesian probability and inference, develop strong intuition for Bayesian 
constructs, provide a foundation in statistical learning, and to show how Bayesian methods are fundamental to 
a variety of modern statistical learning techniques. Topics include probabilistic reasoning, Bayesian inference, 
linear models, mixture models, and model selection. Prerequisite: (Mathematics 216, 218, or 221) and 
(Statistical Science 130L, Statistical Science 240L, Mathematics 230, Mathematics 340, ECE 380, ECE 555, or 
EGR 238L) and (EGR 103L, Computer Science 101L, or Computer Science 201). Instructor: Tantum. One course.
483. Introduction to Digital Communication Systems. Introduction to the design and analysis of 
modern digital communication systems. Communication channel characterization. Baseband and passband 
modulation techniques. Optimal demodulation techniques with performance comparisons. Key information-
theoretic concepts including entropy and channel capacity. Channel-coding techniques based on block, 
convolutional and Trellis codes. Equalization techniques. Applications to design of digital telephone modems, 
compact discs and digital wireless communication systems. Prerequisite: ECE 280L and one of (Statistical 
Science 130L or Statistical Science 240L or Mathematics 230 or or Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 or ECE 555 or 
Engineering 238L). Instructor: Calderbank or Krolik. One course.
485. Digital Audio and Acoustic Signal Processing. Fundamental concepts, theory & practice of digital 
audio and acoustic signal processing. Concerning the process of transducing, digitizing, filtering, transforming, 
coding, storing, manipulating, transmitting, distributing, analyzing & reproducing high quality music and 
other acoustic signals. Topics: signal quantization, discrete-time signal analysis, audio digital filtering and 
equalization, hearing for audio applications, audio perceptual encoding (e.g. MP3), time and pitch-scale 
modification, room acoustics, audio spatial effects, 3-D audio rendition, basic microphone array processing. 
Prerequisite: ECE 280L and one of (Statistical Science 130L or Statistical Science 240L or Mathematics 230 or 
or Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 or ECE 555 or Engineering 238L). Instructor: Krolik or Pfister. One course.
488. Digital Image and Multidimensional Processing. Introduction to the theory and methods of digital 
image and video sampling, denoising, coding, reconstruction, and analysis. Both linear methods (such as 2- and 
3-D Fourier analysis) and non-linear methods (such as wavelet analysis). Key topics include segmentation, 
interpolation, registration, noise removal, edge enhancement, halftoning and inverse halftoning, deblurring, 
tomographic reconstruction, superresolution, compression, and feature extraction. While this course covers 
techniques used in a wide variety of contexts, it places a strong emphasis on medical imaging applications. 



 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)844

Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 280L. Instructor: Collins or Wang. One course. C-L: 
Information Science + Studies
489. Advanced Robot System Design. Teams of students will design, implement, and integrate a robotic 
system to perform intelligent physical tasks. Example tasks might include navigation, coordinated movement, 
or object manipulation, among others. Perception, control, and artificial intelligence software will be applied 
to operate sensing and actuation hardware. Robot middleware for distributed system integration. Simulation 
prototyping, unit testing, and metrics for performance evaluation. Major design project. Prerequisite: ECE 230L, 
250D, 270DL, 280L, and 383 and (ECE 353/Computer Science 310 or ECE 356/Computer Science 356 or ECE 
382L) and (Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Statistical Science 130L or Mathematics 230 or ECE 555 or ECE 380 
or Statistical Science 240L or EGR 238L or Mathematics 340) and (Physics 152L or 26) and (Chemistry 101DL 
or 20 or 21). Instructor: Brooke. One course.
490D. Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Study arranged on a special electrical 
and computer engineering topic in which the faculty has particular interest and competence as a result of 
research and professional activities. Instructor consent required. One course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
490L. Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Study arranged on a special electrical 
and computer engineering topic in which the faculty has particular interest and competence as a result of 
research and professional activities. Instructor consent required. One course. Instructor: Staff. One course.
493. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Project arranged on a special topic by an 
instructor with related interests and expertise. For senior students. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
494. Projects in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Project arranged on a special topic by an 
instructor with related interests and expertise. For senior students. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
495. Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Study of selected topics in electrical 
engineering tailored to fit the requirements of a small group. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Half course or one course each. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
496. Special Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Study of selected topics in electrical 
engineering tailored to fit the requirements of a small group. Consent of instructor and director of 
undergraduate studies required. Half course or one course each. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
499. ECE Professional Development. This required course for seniors complements their senior design 
experience by exposing soon-to-be graduates to aspects of life as a professional engineer, or in other fields 
where their undergraduate engineering training will serve them well. In a weekly interactive format, students 
will participate in discussions of topics selected to better prepare them for their time after Duke. Senior status 
required. Instructor: Staff. Quarter course.
511. Foundations of Nanoscale Science and Technology. One course. C-L: see Nanosciences 511; also 
C-L: Chemistry 611
512. Emerging Nanoelectronic Devices. Brief review of semiconductor device physics followed by 
coverage of the most prominent emerging nanoelectronic devices. Topics include: nanoelectronic logic devices 
(advanced silicon transistors, carbon nanotube transistors, spintronics, 2D FETs, NEMS, tunnel FETs, negative 
capacitance FETs and piezoelectronics), and nanoelectronic memory devices (phase change, spin transfer 
torque, nanomechanical, ferroelectric FET, and molecular memory). Students will understand basic operation, 
pros/cons of performance, and primary integration challenges. Students conduct case study project, culminating 
with class presentation. Prerequisite: ECE 230L or graduate student standing. Instructor: Franklin. One course.
521. Quantum Mechanics. Discussion of wave mechanics including elementary applications, free particle 
dynamics, Schrödinger equation including treatment of systems with exact solutions, and approximate methods 
for time-dependent quantum mechanical systems with emphasis on quantum phenomena underlying solid-state 
electronics and physics. Prerequisite: Mathematics 216 or equivalent. Instructor: Brady, Brown, or Stiff-Roberts. 
One course.
522. Introduction to Micro-Electromechanical Systems (MEMS). Design, simulation, fabrication, and 
characterization of micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) devices. Integration of non-conventional devices 



Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) 845

into functional systems. Principles of fabrication, mechanics in micrometer scale, transducers and actuators, 
and issues in system design and integration. Topics presented in the context of example systems. Lab covers 
design, simulation, and realization of MEMS devices using commercially available foundry process. Prerequisite: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 230L or Mechanical Engineering 344L or equivalent. Instructor: Kim. One 
course.
523. Quantum Information Science. NS, QS Fundamental concepts and progress in quantum information 
science. Quantum circuits, quantum universality theorem, quantum algorithms, quantum operations and 
quantum error correction codes, fault-tolerant architectures, security in quantum communications, quantum 
key distribution, physical systems for realizing quantum logic, quantum repeaters and long-distance quantum 
communication. Prerequisites: Electrical and Computer Engineering 521 or Physics 464 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Kim or Marvian. One course. C-L: Physics 627
524. Introduction to Solid-State Physics. Discussion of solid-state phenomena including crystalline 
structures, X-ray and particle diffraction in crystals, lattice dynamics, free electron theory of metals, energy 
bands, and superconductivity, with emphasis on understanding electrical and optical properties of solids. 
Prerequisite: quantum physics at the level of Physics 264L or Electrical and Computer Engineering 521. 
Instructor: A. Brown or Teitsworth. One course.
525. Semiconductor Physics. A quantitative treatment of the physical processes that underlie 
semiconductor device operation. Topics include band theory and conduction phenomena; equilibrium and 
nonequilibrium charge carrier distributions; charge generation, injection, and recombination; drift and diffusion 
processes. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 330L or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
526. Semiconductor Devices for Integrated Circuits. Basic semiconductor properties (energy-
band structure, effective density of states, effective masses, carrier statistics, and carrier concentrations). 
Electron and hole behavior in semiconductors (generation, recombination, drift, diffusion, tunneling, and 
basic semiconductor equations). Current-voltage, capacitance-voltage, and static and dynamic models of PN 
Junctions, Schottky barriers, Metal/Semiconductor Contacts, Bipolar-Junction Transistors, MOS Capacitors, 
MOS-Gated Diodes, and MOS Field-Effect Transistors. SPICE models and model parameters. Prerequisites: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 330L. Instructor: Massoud. One course.
527. Analog Integrated Circuits. Analysis and design of bipolar and CMOS analog integrated circuits. SPICE 
device models and circuit macromodels. Classical operational amplifier structures, current feedback amplifiers, 
and building blocks for analog signal processing, including operational transconductance amplifiers and current 
conveyors. Biasing issues, gain and bandwidth, compensation, and noise. Influence of technology and device 
structure on circuit performance. Extensive use of industry-standard CAD tools, such as Analog Workbench. 
Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 526. Instructor: Staff. One course.
528. Integrated Circuit Engineering. Basic processing techniques and layout technology for integrated 
circuits. Photolithography, diffusion, oxidation, ion implantation, and metallization. Design, fabrication, and 
testing of integrated circuits. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 330L or 331L. Instructor: Fair. 
One course.
529. Digital Integrated Circuits. Analysis and design of digital integrated circuits in deep submicron MOS 
technology. Brief review of IC technology, MOSFETs, and interconnects. Switching characteristics (propagation 
delay) and power consumption in NMOS/CMOS devices and interconnects. Analysis of static and dynamic 
logic circuits (inverters, gates) and memory circuits (SRAMs, DRAMs, Flash). Influence of technology and 
device structure on performance and reliability of digital ICs. SPICE modeling. Memory array design project. 
Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 331L or graduate student standing. Instructor: Massoud. One 
course.
531. Power Electronic Circuits for Energy Conversion. Efficient conversion of electrical energy is critical 
for electric and hybrid vehicles, wind and solar energy, power grids, computers, medical devices, and portables. 
This course teaches analysis and design of power electronic circuits for energy conversion, including circuit 
operation (converter topologies, steady-state modeling, switch realization), converter control (ac modeling, 
small-signal transfer functions, feedback), and magnetics (inductors, transformers). The course shares lectures 
with ECE/Energy Engineering 431, but has extended assignments. Prerequisite: ECE 230L or Engineering 



 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)846

224L or graduate student standing. Not open to students who have taken ECE 431 or Energy Engineering 431. 
Instructor: Peterchev. One course. C-L: Energy Engineering 531
532. Analog Integrated Circuit Design. Design and layout of CMOS analog integrated circuits. Qualitative 
review of the theory of pn junctions, bipolar and MOS devices, and large and small signal models. Emphasis 
on MOS technology. Continuous time operational amplifiers. Frequency response, stability and compensation. 
Complex analog subsystems including phase-locked loops, A/D and D/A converters, switched capacitor 
simulation, layout, extraction, verification, and MATLAB modeling. Projects make extensive use of full custom 
VLSI CAD software. Prerequisite: [(ECE 330L or 331L) and ECE 230L and 250D and 270DL and 280L and 
(Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Statistical Science 130L or Mathematics 230 or ECE 555 or ECE 380 or 
Statistical Science 240L or EGR 238L or Mathematics 340) and (Physics 152L or 26) and (Chemistry 101DL or 
20 or 21)] or graduate-student standing. Instructor: Morizio. One course.
533. Biochip Engineering. A problem-solving course in which students consider technology options for a 
complete lab-on-a-chip design. Lectures cover the basics of analog flow microfluidic devices, digital microfluidic 
devices, fabrication technologies for discrete devices, system integration issues, and a significant emphasis on 
biological applications for analysis, sample preparation, and detection issues. Technologies covered will include 
microfluidic devices, electrophoresis, analytical methods used in genetics, sample preparation methods, and 
analyte detection. Prerequisites: Biology 201L, Chem 101DL, and Physics 152L (or equivalents). Instructor: Fair. 
One course.
534. CAD For Mixed-Signal Circuits. The course focuses on various aspects of design automation for 
mixed-signal circuits. Circuit simulation methods including graph-based circuit representation, automated 
derivation and solving of nodal equations, and DC analysis, test automation approaches including test 
equipment, test generation, fault simulation, and built-in-self-test, and automated circuit synthesis including 
architecture generation, circuit synthesis, tack generation, placement and routing are the major topics. The 
course will have one major project, 4-6 homework assignments, one midterm, and one final. Prerequisites: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 331L. Permission of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
536. Synthesis and Verification of VLSI Systems. Algorithms and CAD tools for VLSI synthesis and 
design verification, logic synthesis, multi-level logic optimization, high-level synthesis, logic simulation, timing 
analysis, formal verification. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 350L or equivalent. Instructor: 
Chakrabarty. One course.
537. Radiofrequency (RF) Transceiver Design. Design of wireless radiofrequency transceivers. Analog 
and digital modulation, digital modulation schemes, system level design for receiver and transmitter path, 
wireless communication standards and determining system parameters for standard compliance, fundamentals 
of synthesizer design, and circuit level design of low-noise amplifiers and mixers. Prerequisites: Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 280L and Electrical and Computer Engineering 331L or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
538. VLSI System Testing. Fault modeling, fault simulation, test generation algorithms, testability measures, 
design for testability, scan design, built-in self-test, system-on-a-chip testing, memory testing. Prerequisite: 
Electrical and Computer Engineering 350L or equivalent. Instructor: Chakrabarty. One course.
539. CMOS VLSI Design Methodologies. Emphasis on full-custom digital ASIC design using CMOS 
technology. Extensive use of CAD tools for IC design, simulation, and layout verification. Includes techniques 
for designing high-speed, low-power, easily-testable circuits. Semester design project: Student groups design 
and simulate simple custom IC using Mentor Graphics CAD tools. Formal project proposal, written project 
report, and formal project presentation required. Prerequisite: [ECE 350L, 331L, 230L, 250D, 270DL, and 280L 
and (Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Statistical Science 130L or Statistical Science 240L or Mathematics 230 or 
Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 or ECE 555 or EGR 238L) and (Physics 152L or 26) and (Chemistry 101DL or 20 
or 21)] or graduate-student standing. Instructor: Chakrabarty or Morizio. One course.
541. Advanced Optics. QS One course. C-L: see Physics 621; also C-L: Biomedical Engineering 552
545. Foundations of Nanoelectronics & Nanophotonics. Theory and applications of nanoelectronics 
and nanophotonics. Quantum dots and wells, metal nanoparticles, organic-inorganic interfaces, graphene, next 
generation transistors, light emitters, and sensors. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 230L and 
270DL or equivalent. Instructor: Brown or Litchinitser. One course.



Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) 847

546. Optoelectronic Devices. Devices for conversion of electrons to photons and photons to electrons. 
Optical processes in semiconductors: absorption, spontaneous emission and stimulated emission. Light-
emitting diodes (LEDs), semiconductor lasers, quantum-well emitters, photodetectors, modulators and optical 
fiber networks. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 526 or equivalent. Instructor: Jokerst or 
Stiff-Roberts. One course.
550D. Fundamentals of Computer Systems and Engineering. Fundamentals of computer systems and 
engineering for master’s students whose undergraduate background did not cover this material. Topics covered 
include: Digital logic, assembly programming, computer architecture, memory hierarchies and technologies, 
IO, hardware implementation in VHDL, operating systems, and networking. Undergraduates may not take this 
course and should take ECE 250D, 353, and/or 356 instead. Corequisite: ECE 551D. Instructor: Hilton. One 
course.
552. Advanced Computer Architecture I. QS, R One course. C-L: see Computer Science 550
554. Fault-Tolerant and Testable Computer Systems. Technological reasons for faults, fault models, 
information redundancy, spatial redundancy, backward and forward error recovery, fault-tolerant hardware and 
software, modeling and analysis, testing, and design for test. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 
250D or equivalent. Instructor: Sorin. One course. C-L: Computer Science 554
555. Probability for Electrical and Computer Engineers. Basic concepts and techniques used stochastic 
modeling of systems with applications to performance and reliability of computer and communications system. 
Elements of probability, random variables (discrete and continuous), expectation, conditional distributions, 
stochastic processes, discrete and continuous time Markov chains, introduction to queuing systems and 
networks. Prerequisite: Mathematics 216. Instructor: Trivedi. One course. C-L: Computer Science 555, 
Information Science + Studies
556. Wireless Networking and Mobile Computing. Theory, design, and implementation of mobile 
wireless networking systems. Fundamentals of wireless networking and key research challenges. Students 
review pertinent journal papers. Significant, semester-long research project. Networking protocols (Physical and 
MAC, multi-hop routing, wireless TCP, applications), mobility management, security, and sensor networking. 
Prerequisites: Electrical and Computer Engineering 356 or Computer Science 310. Instructor: Staff. One course. 
C-L: Computer Science 515
557. Performance and Reliability of Computer Networks. Methods for performance and reliability 
analysis of local area networks as well as wide area networks. Probabilistic analysis using Markov models, 
stochastic Petri nets, queuing networks, and hierarchical models. Statistical analysis of measured data and 
optimization of network structures. Prerequisites: Electrical and Computer Engineering 356 and 555. Instructor: 
Trivedi. One course. C-L: Information Science + Studies
558. Advanced Computer Networks. QS, R One course. C-L: see Computer Science 514
559. Advanced Digital System Design. Fundamentals of advanced digital system design, and the use 
of a hardware description language, VHDL, for their synthesis and simulation. System examples include 
the arithmetic/logic unit, memory, and microcontrollers. Team-based project incorporates engineering 
standards and realistic constraints, and also considers most of the following: Cost, environmental impact, 
manufacturability, health and safety, ethics, social and political impact. Prerequisite: [ECE 350L, 230L, 250D, 
270DL, and 280L and (Mathematics 353 or 356) and (Statistical Science 130L or Statistical Science 240L or 
Mathematics 230 or Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 or ECE 555 or EGR 238L) and (Physics 152L or 26) and 
(Chemistry 101DL or 20 or 21) and ECE 331L (prerequisite or corequisite)] or graduate-student standing. 
Instructor: Derby. One course.
560. Computer and Information Security. An intense trip through many facets of computer and 
information security. Includes discussion and practical exercises in risk management, threat modeling, applied 
cryptography, malicious software, network security, intrusion detection and prevention, software and OS 
security, auditing and forensics, reverse engineering, and social engineering. Includes many hands-on security 
assignments. Prerequisite: Computer Science 310, ECE 353, or ECE 650. Instructor: Bletsch. One course.
561. Datacenter Architecture. Advanced topics in data centers with emphasis on computer architecture and 
systems. Surveys recent advances in processor, memory, network, storage, and modern software systems that 
run in computing clouds. Discussion-oriented classes focus on in-depth analysis of readings. Students will learn 



 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)848

to reason about datacenter performance and energy efficiency. Students will complete a collaborative research 
project. Prerequisite: ECE 250D or Computer Science 250D or ECE 550D. Instructor: Lee. One course.
562. Energy-Efficient Computer Systems. Advanced topics in energy-efficient computing with an 
emphasis on computer architecture and systems. Surveys recent advances in diverse platforms, ranging from 
high-performance, enterprise domains to low-power, mobile domains. Discussion-oriented classes focus on 
in-depth analysis of readings. Students will learn to reason about energy efficiency across the hardware/software 
interface and across a range of system components. Students will complete a collaborative research project. 
Prerequisite: ECE 250D or Computer Science 250D or ECE 550D. Instructor: Lee. One course.
563. Cloud Computing. In a seminar format, explore a number of the underlying technologies, business 
models, and innovations underpinning current widespread deployment of “cloud” computing systems, services, 
and applications. Each student will be expected to choose a relevant subject, identify appropriate advance 
readings for the class, and lead one discussion on topics of interest to the group. There will be a project 
component to the course; some projects may be in the form of literature reviews and papers, others will involve 
practical experience creating and deploying a useful service or application in a cloud environment. Instructor: 
Board. One course.
564. Mobile Application Development. Explores the world of mobile application development with focus 
on needs of engineers. Centered on Apple environment, with the development environment being on OS X and 
the target environment being an iOS device – iPad, iPhone, iPod Touch or Apple Watch. Real world context 
focused on the common programming “patterns” for engineers in academia or business – standalone apps, apps 
connected to other systems, apps connected to the cloud. Covers fundamentals essential to understanding all 
aspects of app development. Taught in a team environment. Students required to present their project proposals 
and deliver an app as a final project. Prerequisite: Computer Science 308 or ECE 551D. Instructor: Telford. One 
course.
565. Performance Optimization & Parallelism. Analyzing and optimizing the performance of software, 
in both a single- and multi-threaded setting. Apply knowledge of hardware, programming, and assembly to both 
tasks. Single-threaded performance topics include code profiling & analysis, loop transformation, analysis of 
interaction of code & memory hierarchy, assembly level instruction scheduling impacts. Multi-threaded topics 
include scalability & load balance. For students with strong foundation of programming skills in high-level 
languages, assembly language, and computer architecture & design. Prerequisite: [(ECE/Computer Science 
250D and [Computer Science 310 or ECE 353]) or (ECE 550D and ECE 551D)] and ECE 552 (may be taken 
concurrently). Recommended prerequisite: ECE 650. Instructor: Rogers. One course.
566. Enterprise Storage Architecture. Study the design and deployment of massive storage systems of 
the sort used in large enterprises (banks, major IT departments, service providers, etc.). Includes coverage of 
hard disk and flash design, RAID, SAN and NAS topologies, filesystem design, data center architectures for 
high availability, data deduplication, business continuity, and the economics of data storage with respect to 
cloud computing. Includes a few homeworks and a semester-long programming project. Prerequisite: graduate 
students: ECE 650; undergraduate students: Computer Science 310 or ECE 353. Instructor: Bletsch. One course.
567. Cyber-Physical System Design. Complex interactions between information technology and physical 
world in Cyber-Physical Systems (CPS) challenge standard design methods that ignore cross-cutting constraints. 
This course addresses CPS design challenges by exploiting theory and methods from embedded systems, 
controls, and formal methods. Course covers topics related to the integration of system modeling, analysis, and 
automatic synthesis into design frameworks that ensure closed-loop safety and performance under known and 
unknown operating conditions. Balances establishing a working knowledge of CPS design and analysis methods 
with understanding the theory behind them. Prerequisite: ECE 350L and Computer Science 310/ECE 353, or 
graduate-student standing. Instructor: Pajic. One course.
568. Engineering Robust Server Software. In this course, students learn about important principles 
in server software design and development. These principles include topics such as handling asynchronous 
behavior, design for failure, basic security principles, scalability, and resilience. Students will put these 
ideas into practices by developing software reflecting the ideas learned in class. Prerequisite: ECE 551D and 
corequisite ECE 650, or Computer Science 308 and ECE 353 and ECE 356. Instructor: Hilton or Rogers. One 
course.



Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) 849

571. Electromagnetic Theory. The classical theory of Maxwell’s equations; electrostatics, magnetostatics, 
boundary value problems including numerical solutions, currents and their interactions, and force and energy 
relations. Three class sessions. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 270DL. Instructor: Carin, 
Joines, Liu, Padilla, or Smith. One course.
572. Electromagnetic Communication Systems. Review of fundamental laws of Maxwell, Gauss, Ampere, 
and Faraday. Elements of waveguide propagation and antenna radiation. Analysis of antenna arrays by images. 
Determination of gain, loss, and noise temperature parameters for terrestrial and satellite electromagnetic 
communication systems. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 270DL or 571. Instructor: Joines. 
One course.
573. Optical Communication Systems. Mathematical methods, physical ideas, and device concepts of 
optoelectronics. Maxwell’s equations, and definitions of energy density and power flow. Transmission and 
reflection of plane waves at interfaces. Optical resonators, waveguides, fibers, and detectors are also presented. 
Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 270DL or equivalent. Instructor: Joines. One course.
574. Waves in Matter. Analysis of wave phenomena that occur in materials based on fundamental 
formulations for electromagnetic and elastic waves. Examples from these and other classes of waves are used 
to demonstrate general wave phenomena such as dispersion, anisotropy, and causality; phase, group, and 
energy propagation velocities and directions; propagation and excitation of surface waves; propagation in 
inhomogeneous media; and nonlinearity and instability. Applications that exploit these wave phenomena in 
general sensing applications are explored. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 270DL. Instructor: 
Cummer. One course.
575. Microwave Electronic Circuits. Microwave circuit analysis and design techniques. Properties of 
planar transmission lines for integrated circuits. Matrix and computer-aided methods for analysis and design 
of circuit components. Analysis and design of input, output, and interstage networks for microwave transistor 
amplifiers and oscillators. Topics on stability, noise, and signal distortion. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 270DL or equivalent. Instructor: Joines. One course.
577. Computational Electromagnetics. Systematic discussion of useful numerical methods in 
computational electromagnetics including integral equation techniques and differential equation techniques, 
both in the frequency and time domains. Hands-on experience with numerical techniques, including the method 
of moments, finite element and finite-difference time-domain methods, and modern high order and spectral 
domain methods. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 571 or consent of instructor. Instructor: 
Carin or Liu. One course.
578. Inverse Problems in Electromagnetics and Acoustics. Systematic discussion of practical inverse 
problems in electromagnetics and acoustics. Hands-on experience with numerical solution of inverse problems, 
both linear and nonlinear in nature. Comprehensive study includes: discrete linear and nonlinear inverse 
methods, origin and solution of nonuniqueness, tomography, wave-equation based linear inverse methods, and 
nonlinear inverse scattering methods. Assignments are project oriented using MATLAB. Prerequisites: Graduate 
level acoustics or electromagnetics (Electrical and Computer Engineering 571), or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Liu. One course.
580. Introduction to Machine Learning. Introduction to core concepts in machine learning and statistical 
pattern recognition, with a focus on discriminative and generative classifiers (nearest-neighbors, Bayes, logistic 
regression, linear discriminant, support vector machine, and relevance vector machine). Dimensionality 
reduction and feature selection. Classifier performance evaluation, bias-variance tradeoff, and cross-validation. 
Prerequisite: (Mathematics 216, Mathematics 218, Mathematics 221, or ECE 586) and (Computer Science 
201 or ECE 551D) and (ECE 480 or ECE 581). Not open to students who have taken Computer Science 671D. 
Instructor: Collins, X. Li, or Tantum. One course.
581. Random Signals and Noise. Introduction to mathematical methods of describing and analyzing 
random signals and noise. Review of basic probability theory; joint, conditional, and marginal distributions; 
random processes. Time and ensemble averages, correlation, and power spectra. Optimum linear smoothing 
and predicting filters. Introduction to optimum signal detection, parameter estimation, and statistical signal 
processing. Prerequisite: one of (STA 130L or STA 240L or Mathematics 230 or or Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 
or ECE 555 or EGR 238L) or graduate student standing. Instructor: Collins or Nolte. One course.



 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)850

582. Digital Signal Processing. Introduction to fundamental algorithms used to process digital signals. 
Basic discrete time system theory, the discrete Fourier transform, the FFT algorithm, linear filtering using 
the FFT, linear production and the Wierner filter, adaptive filters and applications, the LMS algorithm and 
its convergence, recursive least-squares filters, nonparametric and parametric power spectrum estimation 
minimum variance and eigenanalysis algorithms for spectrum estimation. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 581 or equivalent with consent of the instructor. Instructor: Collins, Krolik, or Nolte. One course. 
One course.
584. Acoustics and Hearing (GE, EL, IM). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 545
585. Signal Detection and Extraction Theory. Introduction to signal detection and information extraction 
theory from a statistical decision theory viewpoint. Subject areas covered within the context of a digital 
environment are decision theory, detection and estimation of known and random signals in noise, estimation 
of parameters and adaptive recursive digital filtering, and decision processes with finite memory. Applications 
to problems in communication theory. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 581 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Nolte. One course.
586. Vector Space Methods with Applications. Covers key concepts from advanced linear algebra that 
are used regularly in ECE/CS journal papers on signal processing, communications, circuit design, and machine 
learning (e.g., logic, topology, vector spaces, optimization). Key mathematical ideas/proofs will be presented 
and applied. Uses application topics such as Markov chains, alternating projections, and pattern classification 
to illustrate important mathematical topics. Background in linear algebra, a high-level programming language, 
and probability is assumed. Prerequisite: [(Mathematics 216, 221, or 218) and (Engineering 103L or Computer 
Science 201) and (STA 130 or STA 240L or Mathematics 230 or Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 or ECE 555 or 
EGR 238L) and ECE 280L] or graduate student standing. Instructor: Pfister. One course.
587. Information Theory. Information theory is the science of processing, transmitting, storing, and 
using information. This course provides an introduction to mathematical measures of information and their 
connection to practical problems in communication, compression, and inference. Entropy, mutual information, 
lossless data compression, channel capacity, Gaussian channels, rate distortion theory, Fisher information. 
Useful for researchers in a variety of fields, including signal processing, machine learning, statistics, and 
neuroscience. Appropriate for beginning graduate students in electrical engineering, computer science, 
statistics, and math with a background in probability. Instructor: Reeves or Carin. One course. C-L: Statistical 
Science 563
588. Image and Video Processing: From Mars to Hollywood with a Stop at the Hospital. Intro 
to image formation, image compression, image enhancement & image segmentation. Covers geometric and 
non-geometric tools, as well as spatial and non-spatial operations. Extension to color images and video. 
Addresses recent progress in the area, including image inpainting (how to remove objects from images and 
video), image processing via sparse modeling & compressed sensing, geometric partial differential equations 
for image analysis, image processing for HIV & virus research, image processing for neurosurgery & other 
medical applications. Prerequisite: [ECE 280L and (Mathematics 216, 221, or 218) and (STA 130L or STA 240L 
or Mathematics 230 or Mathematics 340 or ECE 380 or ECE 555 or EGR 238L)] or graduate student standing. 
Instructor: Sapiro. One course.
590. Advanced Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Opportunity for study of advanced 
subjects related to programs within the electrical and computer engineering department tailored to fit the 
requirements of a small group. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
590-1. Advanced Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Opportunity for study of advanced 
subjects in electrical and computer engineering. 1 unit. Instructor: Staff.
590D. Advanced Topics in Electrical and Computer Engineering. Opportunity for study of advanced 
subjects related to programs within the electrical and computer engineering department tailored to fit the 
requirements of a small group. Has discussion. Instructor: Staff. One course.
611. Nanoscale and Molecular Scale Computing. Students study the design and analysis of nanoscale 
computing systems. Topics include nanoelectronic devices (e.g., graphene and carbon nanotube transistors, 
quantum dots, etc.), computational paradigms (conventional von Neumann, quantum cellular automata, 
quantum computing, etc.), microarchitecture and instruction set design specific to nanoscale systems, defect and 



Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE) 851

fault tolerance, fabrication techniques (e.g., self-assembly), modeling and simulation methods. This course relies 
on current literature and student discussion. Prerequisites: Electrical and Computer Engineering 350, Electrical 
and Computer Engineering 511. Instructor: Lebeck. One course. C-L: Computer Science 624
650. Systems Programming and Engineering. Focuses on a range of topics that are central to both the 
design of operating systems and the programming system-level software. Students will apply knowledge of 
basic concepts in operating systems, networking, and programming towards these two areas. Topics covered 
will include concurrency, process management, hypervisors, networking, security, databases, and file systems. 
Students will be expected to demonstrate their understanding in these areas through a series of programming 
assignments covering these topics. Prerequisite: ECE 550D and (ECE 551D or ECE 751D). Instructor: Younes. 
One course.
651. Software Engineering. Teaches students about all steps of the software development lifecycle: 
requirements definition, design, development, testing, and maintenance. The course assumes students are 
skilled object-oriented programmers from prior courses, but will include a rapid introduction to Java. Students 
complete team-based semester-long software project which will progress through all phases of the software 
lifecycle. Prerequisite: ECE 551D. Instructor: Daily or Hilton. One course.
652. Advanced Computer Architecture II. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 650
675. Optical Imaging and Spectroscopy. Wave and coherence models for propagation and optical system 
analysis. Fourier optics and sampling theory. Focal plane arrays. Generalized and compressive sampling. 
Impulse response, modulation transfer function and instrument function analysis of imaging and spectroscopy. 
Code design for optical measurement. Dispersive and interferometric spectroscopy and spectral imaging. 
Performance metrics in optical imaging systems. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 270DL and 
280L. Instructor: Brady. One course.
676. Lens Design. Paraxial and computational ray tracing. Merit functions. Wave and chromatic aberrations. 
Lenses in photography, microscopy and telescopy. Spectrograph design. Emerging trends in lens system design, 
including multiple aperture and catadioptric designs and nonimaging design for solar energy collection. Design 
project management. Each student must propose and complete a design study, including a written project report 
and a formal design review. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 340L or 375. Instructor: Brady. 
One course.
681. Pattern Classification and Recognition Technology. Theory and practice of recognition technology: 
pattern classification, pattern recognition, automatic computer decision-making algorithms. Applications 
covered include medical diseases, severe weather, industrial parts, biometrics, bioinformation, animal 
behavior patterns, image processing, and human visual systems. Perception as an integral component of 
intelligent systems. This course prepares students for advanced study of data fusion, data mining, knowledge 
base construction, problem-solving methodologies of “intelligent agents” and the design of intelligent control 
systems. Prerequisites: Mathematics 216, Statistical Science 130 or Mathematics 230, Computer Science 101, or 
consent of instructor. Instructor: Collins or Tantum. One course.
682D. Probabilistic Machine Learning. QS One course. C-L: see Statistical Science 561D; also C-L: 
Computer Science 571D
683. Digital Communication Systems. Digital modulation techniques. Coding theory. Transmission over 
bandwidth constrained channels. Signal fading and multipath effects. Spread spectrum. Optical transmission 
techniques. Prerequisite: Electrical and Computer Engineering 581 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
684. Natural Language Processing. Introduction to algorithmic and analytic methods specific to textual 
data. Subject areas covered are speech recognition, optical character recognition, text parsing, and document 
analysis. Analysis tools taught include sentiment analysis/topic models, auto-correct, auto-complete, 
and translation systems. Applications to brain-computer interface communication systems, intelligent 
personal assistants, and plagiarism detection systems. Prerequisite: STA 130L, STA 240L, Mathematics 230, 
Mathematics 340, ECE 380, ECE 555, ECE 580, ECE 581, ECE 682D, EGR 238L, or ECE 551D. Instructor: 
Wang. One course.
685D. Introduction to Deep Learning. Provides an introduction to the machine learning technique called 
deep learning or deep neural networks. A focus will be the mathematical formulations of deep networks and 



 Electrical and Computer Engineering (ECE)852

an explanation of how these networks can be structured and “learned” from big data. Discussion section covers 
practical applications, programming, and modern implementation practices. Example code and assignments 
will be given in Python with heavy utilization of PyTorch (or Tensorflow) package. The course and a project will 
cover various applications including image classification, text analysis, object detection, etc. Prerequisite: ECE 
580, ECE 681, ECE 682D, Statistical Science 561D, or Computer Science 571D. Instructor: Tarokh. One course.
686. Adaptive Filters. Adaptive digital signal processing with emphasis on the theory and design of finite-
impulse response adaptive filters. Stationary discrete-time stochastic processes, Wiener filter theory, the method 
of steepest descent, adaptive transverse filters using gradient-vector estimation, analysis of the LMS algorithm, 
least-squares methods, recursive least squares and least squares lattice adaptive filters. Application examples in 
noise canceling, channel equalization, and array processing. Prerequisites: Electrical and Computer Engineering 
581 and 582 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Krolik. One course.
687D. Machine Learning - Introductory PhD Level. QS One course. C-L: see Computer Science 671D; 
also C-L: Statistical Science 671D
688. Sensor Array Signal Processing. An in-depth treatment of the fundamental concepts, theory, and 
practice of sensor array processing of signals carried by propagating waves. Topics include: multidimensional 
frequency-domain representations of space-time signals and linear systems; apertures and sampling of space-
time signals; beamforming and filtering in the space-time and frequency domains, discrete random fields; 
adaptive beamforming methods; high resolution spatial spectral estimation; optimal detection, estimation, 
and performance bounds for sensor arrays; wave propagation models used in sensor array processing; blind 
beamforming and source separation methods; multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) array processing; 
application examples from radar, sonar, and communications systems. Instructor: Krolik. One course.

The Major
The requirements for the electrical and computer engineering major are included in the minimum total of 

34.0 course credits listed under the general requirements and departmental requirements. The following specific 
courses or their approved alternatives must be taken: Electrical and Computer Engineering 110L; Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 230L, 250D, 270DL, 280L; Computer Science 201; four approved electrical and computer 
engineering concentration electives, in two different areas with at least two courses in one of the elected areas; two 
elective electrical and computer engineering courses at the 300-level or higher; and one electrical and computer 
engineering design course. Currently, Electrical and Computer Engineering 449, 458, 459, 489, 559, 532, and 
539 are approved as electrical and computer engineering design electives. To fulfill the fourth natural science 
requirement (of the general engineering requirements), students must take an approved biology course (Biology 
201L, 202L, 275A, or 311) or a 300-level course from a natural science or engineering department. A statistical 
science course is also required (Statistical Science 130, Mathematics 230, Electrical and Computer Engineering 
380, or Electrical and Computer Engineering 555).

To encourage depth and breadth in electrical and computer engineering, students must select a minimum of 
four upper-level courses in at least two areas of concentration, with no less than two courses in one of the elected 
areas. There are five areas of concentration: (1) computer engineering and digital systems, (2) signal processing, 
communications, and control systems, (3) solid-state devices and integrated circuits, (4) electromagnetic fields, 
and (5) photonics. Students are encouraged to consult with their advisors when selecting areas of concentration 
and electives.

A sample, semester-by-semester sequencing of the requirements for the major is available online at https://
ece.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/planning.

The Minor
The requirements for the minor in electrical and computer engineering is composed of five courses in 

electrical and computer engineering including three core courses selected Electrical and Computer Engineering 
110L, Electrical and Computer Engineering 230L, Electrical and Computer Engineering 250D, Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 270DL, and Electrical and Computer Engineering 280L; and two additional electrical 
and computer engineering courses at the 300 level or above. Courses that are used to fulfill the student’s primary 
major may not be double-counted toward the minor. In addition, electrical and computer engineering courses with 

https://ece.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/planning
https://ece.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/planning


Engineering (EGR) 853

content substantially equivalent to courses in the student’s primary major may not be counted toward the minor. 
Students with credit for any of the core courses (e.g., exact or equivalent course taken to satisfy a requirement 
of the primary major) may substitute additional upper-level electrical and computer engineering courses, with 
approval from the director of undergraduate studies in electrical and computer engineering. 

Engineering (Interdepartmental)
Courses in Engineering (EGR)
79S. Thrive. Students engage in small group discussions and activities to explore knowledge of self, build 
resilience, create a community, and develop personal well-being. Students apply wellness strategies to everyday 
life, as well as coping strategies for life’s challenges. Additional topics include: personal values, healthy 
relationships, stress and mental health, self-awareness, personality types, team dynamics, and accessing campus 
resources. Course is intended to help engineering students thrive at Duke University. Open only to first-year 
engineering students. Instructor: Walker, Pittman.
89S. First-Year Seminar. Topics vary each semester offered. Instructor: Staff. One course.
90L. Introduction to Engineering. This course is designed to introduce students to the study and practice 
of engineering. Presentations will be made by representatives of all four engineering departments as well as 
outside practitioners, researchers, and industrial leaders. Selected group design and/or laboratory modules will 
be required of all participants. Satisfactory/Unsatisfactory grading only. Instructor: Franzoni. Half course.
95FS. First Year seminar in Focus. NS, SS, STS Topics vary each semester offered. Focus students only. 
Instructor: staff. One course.
101L. Engineering Design and Communication. Students work in a team to learn and apply the 
engineering design process to solve an open-ended, client-based problem drawn from a community partner. 
In this class, students learn to apply the engineering design process to meet the needs of a client, iteratively 
prototype using tools and materials appropriate to the solution, work collaboratively on a team, and 
communicate the critical steps in the design process in written, oral, and visual formats. First-year Pratt 
students only. Trinity first-year students may take the course with instructor consent. Instructor: Saterbak, 
Santillan. One course.
102L. Design to Deliver. Students work in a team to apply the engineering design process to complete 
an open-ended, client-based problem drawn from a community partner. Prerequisite: Engineering 101L. 
Instructor: Saterbak. Half course.
103L. Computational Methods in Engineering. QS Introduction to computer methods and algorithms for 
analysis and solution of engineering problems using numerical methods in a workstation environment. Topics 
include; numerical integration, roots of equations, simultaneous equation solving, finite difference methods, 
matrix analysis, linear programming, dynamic programming, and heuristic solutions used in engineering 
practice. This course does not require any prior knowledge of computer programming. Instructor: Gustafson. 
One course.
120L. Introduction to Structural Engineering. An introduction to engineering and the engineering 
method through a wide variety of historical and modern case studies, ranging from unique structures like 
bridges to mass produced objects like pencils. Instructor: Petroski. One course.
121L. Engineering Innovation. Introduces first years to the process of team-based creative 
conceptualization, visualization prototyping, and product realization. Students use computer-aided design tools 
to create custom circuit boards and computer numerically controlled (CNC) machined components to produce 
prototype systems. Design concepts are introduced and supported through hands-on assignments. Instructor: 
Twiss and Simmons. One course.
190. Special Topics in Engineering. Study arranged on special engineering topics in which the faculty have 
particular interest and competence as a result of research or professional activities. Consent of instructor(s) 
required. Quarter course, half course, or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
190A. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Engineering. Topics vary by semester. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.



 Engineering (EGR)854

190AS. Duke-Administered Study Abroad: Special Topics in Engineering. Topics vary by semester. 
Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
190L. Special Topics in Engineering with Lab Component. Study arranged on special engineering 
topics in which the faculty have particular interest and competence as a result of research or professional 
activities. This course contains a laboratory component. Instructor: Staff. One course.
201L. Mechanics of Solids. Analysis of force systems and their equilibria as applied to engineering systems. 
Stresses and strains in deformable bodies; mechanical behavior of materials; applications of principles to static 
problems of beams, torsion members, and columns. Selected laboratory work. Prerequisites: Mathematics 112 
and Physics 151L. Instructor: Aquino, Boadu, Dolbow, Franzoni, Gavin, Guilleminot, Hueckel, Nadeau, Scovazzi, 
or Virgin. One course.
206. Engineering Communication. Principles of written and verbal technical communication; graphs, 
tables, charts and figures. Multimedia content generation and presentation. Individual and group written and 
verbal presentations. Prerequisite: Engineering 103L and Writing 101 or equivalent. Instructor: Kabala. Half 
course.
224L. Electrical Fundamentals of Mechatronics. Introduction to mechatronics with a special emphasis 
on electrical components, sensing, and information processing. Topics include circuit analysis and design, 
system response characterization, conversion between digital and analog signals, data acquisition, sensors, 
and motors. Laboratory projects focus on analysis, characterization, and design of electrical and mechatronic 
systems. Prerequisite: (Engineering 103L or Computer Science 201); (Mathematics 112L or 22 or equivalent); 
and (Physics 152L or equivalent). Instructor: Gustafson. One course.
238L. Fundamentals of Data Analysis and Decision Science. This course provides a mathematically 
rigorous and broad foundation for key concepts in probability and statistics, as well as the application of 
probability and statistics to the mathematical modeling of non-deterministic systems. The main motivation of 
the course is to show how these concepts are fundamental to a variety of current data analysis techniques, and 
to demonstrate applications of these techniques in situations relevant to all engineering majors. Prerequisite: 
(Mathematics 216, 218, or 221) and (Engineering 103L or Computer Science 101L). Instructor: Tantum. One 
course.
244L. Dynamics. Principles of dynamics of particles, rigid bodies, and selected nonrigid systems with 
emphasis on engineering applications. Kinematic and kinetic analysis of structural and machine elements in a 
plane and in space using graphical, computer, and analytical vector techniques. Absolute and relative motion 
analysis. Work-energy; impact and impulse-momentum. Laboratory experiments. Prerequisites: Engineering 
201L and Mathematics 212 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Dowell, Hall, Knight, or Virgin. One course.
305. Engineering Systems Optimization and Economics. SS Introduction to mathematical 
optimization, engineering economic analysis, and other decision analysis tools used to evaluate and design 
engineering systems. Application of linear and nonlinear programming, dynamic programming, expert systems, 
simulation and heuristic methods to engineering systems design problems. Applications discussed include: 
production plant scheduling, water resources planning, design and analysis, vehicle routing, resource allocation, 
repair and rehabilitation scheduling and economic analysis of engineering design alternatives. Pratt students 
may not use this course toward the SS/H degree requirement. Corequisite: Mathematics 216. Instructor: Borsuk, 
Gavin. One course. C-L: Economics 212
355. Smart Home Technology Development. Engineering projects related to the Duke Smart Home 
Program are undertaken. Projects should be interdisciplinary in nature and have engineering relevance in the 
sense of undertaking to meet human need through a disciplined approach under the guidance or a member 
of the engineering faculty. Consent of instructor is required. Instructor: staff. 1/2 credit pass/fail course. Half 
course.
391. Projects in Engineering. Courses in which engineering projects of an interdisciplinary nature are 
undertaken. The projects must have engineering relevance in the sense of undertaking to meet human need 
through a disciplined approach under the guidance of a member of the engineering faculty. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
393. Research Projects in Engineering. R Individual research projects in engineering under the guidance 
and supervision of a faculty member, the central goal of which is a substantive paper or written report 



Engineering (EGR) 855

containing significant analysis and interpretation of a previously approved topic. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
424L. Energy and Environment Design. An integrative design course addressing both creative and 
practical aspects of the design of systems related to energy and the environment. Development of the creative 
design process, including problem formulation and needs analysis, feasibility, legal, economic and human 
factors, environmental impacts, energy efficiency, aesthetics, safety, and design optimization. Application of 
design methods through a collaborative design project involving students from the Pratt School of Engineering 
and Trinity College. Open only to students pursuing the undergraduate certificate in Energy and Environment. 
Prerequisites: Civil Engineering 160L, Environment 330 and Mechanical Engineering 461. One course. One 
course.
491. Projects in Engineering. Courses in which engineering projects of an interdisciplinary nature are 
undertaken. The projects must have engineering relevance in the sense of undertaking to meet human need 
through a disciplined approach under the guidance of a member of the engineering faculty. Consent of instructor 
required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
505. Oral English Communications for Engineers. Designed for graduate engineering students who are 
non-native English speakers. Gain the skills necessary to confidently navigate the use of oral English. Learn 
social and academic norms needed for academic success and build interactional competence. Learn to deliver a 
self-introduction, brief overview of research/degree program/professional experience, and navigate small talk 
and social interactions through the development of cultural contexts and an understanding of conversational 
mechanics. Build the skills needed to actively participate in classes, seek help from multiple sources, and 
navigate productive interactions with faculty. Open only to Pratt graduate students. Instructor: Fletcher, 
Bowers. One course.
506. Introductory English Writing for Engineers. This writing course is designed for graduate 
engineering students who are non-native English speakers. The focus will be on writing and revising such 
that the results are clear and concise. Students will produce a variety of academic and professional documents 
pertinent to engineers. Additionally, students will analyze the written work of peers and provide relevant 
feedback. Open only to Pratt graduate students. One course.
590. Special Topics in Engineering. Subjects of an interdepartmental nature in engineering tailored to the 
advanced undergraduate student or first- or second-year graduate student. Instructor consent is required. Half 
course or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
590-1. Special Topics in Engineering. Subjects of an interdepartmental nature in engineering tailored for 
entry-level graduate students. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.

Energy Engineering
The energy engineering minor at Duke adds breadth, depth, and diversity to enrolled students’ educational 

experience by providing rigorous exposure to fundamentals of energy engineering. The program’s objective is to 
prepare graduates to

• engage in engineering careers in diverse areas with particular emphasis on energy-related matters; 
• pursue graduate education and research in energy engineering or energy-related fields; and
• integrate energy concepts in their primary engineering discipline and/or optimize the use of energy 

within their professional pursuits and in society.

Energy Engineering Steering Committee
Neal Simmons (Chair), Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science; Marc Deshusses (Program 

Director), Civil and Environmental Engineering; Nico Hotz, Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science; Nan 
Jokerst, Electrical and Computer Engineering; Josiah Knight, Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science

Eligibility
All Duke engineering undergraduates are eligible to participate in the energy engineering program and 

qualify for the minor. Completion of the minor is noted on the student’s academic transcript.



 Energy Engineering (ENRGYEGR)856

Minor Requirements 
Five unique courses and one capstone design course must be completed to earn the minor in energy 

engineering. The requirements for the minor are:

Core Course
One required: Energy Engineering 310 (Introduction to Energy Generation, Delivery, Conversion and 

Efficiency) or Mechanical Engineering 461 (Energy Engineering and the Environment).

Energy Engineering Area Courses
Four courses required, at least one in each category, up to two outside Duke.

Generation and Delivery
Energy Engineering 490.xx (Special Topics-Bioenergy); Energy Engineering 490.xx (Special Topics-

Renewable Energy Technologies); Energy Engineering 490.xx (Special Topics-Modern Power Systems); Electrical 
and Computer Engineering 341 (Solar Cells); Mechanical Engineering  516 (Thin-Film Photovoltaic Technology).

Conversion and Efficiency
Energy Engineering 490.0xx (Special Topics-Energy for the Built Environment); ECE 431/Energy 

Engineering 431 (Power Electronic Circuits for Energy Conversion); Energy Engineering 490.xx (Energy 
Engineering 370) (Special Topics-Transportation Energy); Mechanical Engineering 490.xx (Power for Mechanical 
Systems).

Other courses not listed here can be considered to fulfill the area course requirements. They are to be 
approved by the energy engineering program director on an individual basis with consideration given to the 
engineering content and relevance to the field. Please contact the program director before enrolling.

Capstone Design
Energy 490L (Energy and Environment Design) or departmental capstone if the project is energy-related, 

with prior approval by the energy engineering program director.
For more information, see https://energy.pratt.duke.edu/. 

Courses in Energy Engineering (ENRGYEGR)
310. Introduction to Energy Generation, Delivery, Conversion and Efficiency. An overall 
introduction to energy issues as they related to generation, delivery, conversion and efficiency. Topics include 
efficiencies of both new and established energy generation and conversion methods, electricity generation by 
fossil fuels, nuclear, solar, wind and hydropower and alternative energy technologies. Other topics include 
space heating and cooling by traditional methods and by solar, transportation energy in automobiles, mass 
transit and freight. Topics are evaluated quantitatively by modeling and using principles of fluid mechanics, 
thermodynamics and heat transfer. The environmental consequences of energy choices on local, national 
and global scales, including toxic emissions, greenhouse gases and resource depletion are also discussed in 
integrated throughout the course. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 331L, or Mechanical Engineering 512, 
or Physics 311, or similar thermodynamics, or consent of instructor. One course. C-L: Energy 310. Course is not 
open to students who have taken Mechanical Engineering 461. Instructors: Cocks and Knight. One course. C-L: 
Energy 310, Energy and the Environment
431. Power Electronic Circuits for Energy Conversion. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 431
490. Special Topics in Energy Engineering. Study arranged on a special topic in which the instructor has 
particular interest and competence. Consent of instructor and director of energy engineering program required. 
Half course or one course each. Topics vary by section. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
531. Power Electronic Circuits for Energy Conversion. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 531

Energy and the Environment 
For courses in energy and the environment, see page 338.

https://energy.pratt.duke.edu/.


Mechanical Engineering (ME) 857

Global Development Engineering
For courses in global development engineering, see page 416.

Mechanical Engineering and Materials Science
Professor Gall, Chair; Associate Professor Bliss, Director of Undergraduate Studies; Assistant Professor of the 
Practice Hotz, Associate Director of Undergraduate Studies; Professors Aquino, Bejan, Brinson, Chilkoti, Cocks, 
Cummings, Curtarolo, Dolbow, Dowell, Gall, Gavin, Glass, Hall, Huang, Hueckel, Mann, Marszalek, Mitzi, Need-
ham, Nelson, Rubinstein, Varghese, Virgin, West, Witelski, Zauscher, and Zhong; Associate Professors Arya, Bliss, 
Blum, Chen, DeFrate, Delaire, Hauser, Howle, Knight, Lad, Payne, Scovazzi, Wiley, Yellen, and Zavlanos; Assis-
tant Professors Bridgeman, Buckland, Codd, Frank-Ito, Guilleminot, Haravifard, Hsu, and Randles; Professor 
of the Practice Franzoni; Associate Professors of the Practice Kielb and W. Simmons; Assistant Professors of the 
Practice Hotz, Santillan, and R. Simmons; Instructor Lipp; Assistant Research Professors Huang, Kopper, Stepp, 
Thomas, and Toher; Research Scientist Tang; Adjunct Professors Ferrari, Laursen, Lorente, and Rubinstein; Ad-
junct Assistant Professors Culver, Jerald, Manson, and Miller; Professors Emeriti Garg, Hochmuth, Shaughnessy, 
Tan, Vann, and Wright

A major in mechanical engineering is available in this department. The mechanical engineering program is 
accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET.6

Mechanical engineers are concerned with the optimum use of materials, energy, time, and individual 
effort to serve societal needs through the design of machines, structures, devices, and mechanical, thermal, and 
electro-dynamic systems, and through better understanding of dynamic processes involving these systems. They 
have a wide involvement in many industries including aerospace, automotive, energy and power generation, 
biomechanical and biomedical engineering, construction, electronics, manufacturing, national defense, and 
transportation systems. Within these industries, the engineer might specialize in the design, analysis, automation, 
operation, or marketing of systems or services. The individual’s contribution may lie anywhere in the spectrum 
from highly theoretical to imminently practical, and often involves leadership as an engineering manager or 
organization executive.

Because mechanical engineers in industry and research engage in such a great variety of activities, their 
education must be broadly based. Our goal is to graduate mechanical engineers who embody excellence in a broad 
sense. We expect our graduates to move to industry positions or on to graduate study, or to carry the attributes 
of an engineering education into other disciplines. The mechanical engineering program of study must include 
mathematics and basic sciences, fundamentals and applications in several engineering sciences, and team-based 
experience in the process of design, where theory is applied in the context of real needs and limitations, and where 
judgment must be exercised. Our mechanical engineering graduates should be able to think critically when solving 
problems and managing tasks and communicate effectively in multidisciplinary professional environments. To be 
a responsible member of the engineering profession, each graduate must be aware of social, ethical, environmental, 
and economic factors and constraints on engineering activity, and must understand the importance of these 
matters in a global context. We aspire to have our graduates exhibit intellectual depth and creativity, uphold high 
ethical standards, and show a commitment to the betterment of society through service and professional work.

To this end, the specific program educational objectives that we look for in our graduates are that they:
• advance professionally in their chosen field;
• contribute to their professional community and to society; and
• engage in lifelong learning in professional and personal endeavors.
The curriculum capitalizes on the exceptional abilities of our highly select students to cultivate the learning, 

thinking, and problem-solving abilities needed to adapt, to develop, and to exercise responsible leadership 
through times of rapid change. The program provides firm preparation in the essential engineering topics while 
allowing wide flexibility for students to pursue their own specialized interests. The overall program requirements 
are summarized following the list of courses.

Courses in Mechanical Engineering (ME)
221L. Structure and Properties of Solids. Introduction to materials science and engineering, emphasizing 
the relationships between the structure of a solid and its properties. Atomic and molecular origins of electrical, 
6  Accredited by the Engineering Accreditation Commission of ABET, https://www.abet.org.

https://www.abet.org


 Mechanical Engineering (ME)858

mechanical, and chemical behavior are treated in some detail for metals, alloys, polymers, ceramics, glasses, 
and composite materials. Prerequisites: Chemistry 20, 21, or 101DL and Engineering 201L or Biomedical 
Engineering 110L. Instructor: Blum, Curtarolo, Delaire, Simmons, West, or Zauscher. One course.
321L. Mechanical Engineering Analysis for Design. Calculation of 3D stresses, strains, and deflections 
encountered in mechanical designs. Types of problems include: curved beams, contact stresses, press/shrink 
fits, etc. Reliability and uncertainty analysis, failure theories, fatigue, and fracture mechanics. Computational 
methods of analysis, such as finite elements analysis are covered. Prerequisites: Engineering 121L, 201L, 244L, 
and Mathematics 353. Instructor: Franzoni, Howle, or Simmons. One course.
331L. Thermodynamics. The principal laws of thermodynamics for open and closed systems and their 
application in engineering. Properties of the pure substance, relationships among properties, mixtures and 
reactions. Power and refrigeration cycle analysis. Prerequisite: Mathematics 212 and Physics 151L. Instructor: 
Bejan, Knight, or Marszalek. One course.
336L. Fluid Mechanics. An introductory course emphasizing the application of the principles of conservation 
of mass, momentum, and energy in a fluid system. Physical properties of fluids, dimensional analysis and 
similitude, viscous effects and integral boundary layer theory, subsonic and supersonic flows, normal 
shockwaves. Selected laboratory work. Prerequisites: Engineering 244L and Mechanical Engineering 331L, Co-
requisite or prerequisite: Mathematics 353. Instructor: Knight or Zhong. One course.
344L. Control of Dynamic Systems. Model dynamic systems, characterize time and frequency domain 
response with respect to particular inputs. Characterize systems in terms of rise-time, settling-time, bandwidth. 
Identify the difference between stable and unstable system. Apply feedback control to modify response of 
dynamic systems. Develop methods of designing compensators for single-input, single-output, and multiple-
input, multiple-output dynamic systems. Introduces optimal control theory, the linear quadratic regulator 
problem, the linear quadratic Gaussian problem. Gain a physical understanding of role of feedback control in 
modifying the dynamics of a system. Prerequisite: (Engineering 224L or ECE 280L) and Mathematics 216. Not 
open to students who have taken ECE 382. Instructor: Bridgeman or Zavlanos. One course. C-L: Electrical and 
Computer Engineering 382L
391. Undergraduate Projects in Mechanical Engineering. Individual projects arranged in consultation 
with a faculty member. Open to students who show special aptitude for research and design. Taught in the Fall. 
Consent of director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
392. Undergraduate Projects in Mechanical Engineering. Individual projects arranged in consultation 
with a faculty member. Open to students who show special aptitude for research and design. Taught in the 
Spring. Consent of director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
394. Engineering Undergraduate Fellows Projects. Intensive research project in Mechanical 
Engineering by students selected as Engineering Undergraduate Fellows. Course credit is contingent upon 
satisfactory completion of 493 and 494. Consent of instructor and program director required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
415L. Failure Analysis and Prevention. A study and analysis of the causes of failure in engineering 
materials and the diagnosis of those causes. Elimination of failures through proper material selection, 
treatment, and use. Case histories. Examination of fracture surfaces. Laboratory investigations of different 
failure mechanisms. Prerequisites: Engineering 201L and Mechanical Engineering 221L. Instructor: Cocks. One 
course.
421L. Mechanical Design. A study of practical aspects of mechanical design including conceptualization, 
specifications, and selection of mechanical elements. The design and application of mechanical components 
such as gears, cams, bearings, springs, and shafts. Practice in application of process through design projects. 
Prerequisite: Engineering 244L and Mechanical Engineering 321L. Instructor: Franzoni, Simmons. One course.
424L. Mechanical Systems Design. An integrative design course addressing both creative and practical 
aspects of the design of systems. Development of the creative design process, including problem formulation and 
needs analysis, feasibility, legal, economic and human factors, aesthetics, safety, synthesis of alternatives, and 
design optimization. Application of design methods through several projects including a term design project. 
Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 344L, 421L, and 431L. Instructor: Kielb or Knight. One course.



Mechanical Engineering (ME) 859

426. Ocean Engineering. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer Engineering 461; also C-L: 
Environment 461
431L. Heat and Mass Transfer. A rigorous development of the laws of mass and energy transport as 
applied to a continuum. Energy transfer by conduction, convection, and radiation. Free and forced convection 
across boundary layers. Application to heat exchangers. Selected laboratory work. Prerequisite: Mechanical 
Engineering 331L, Mechanical Engineering 336L, and Mathematics 353. Instructor: Chen, Hotz, Howle, or 
Knight. One course.
438. Constructal Theory and Design. Flow configuration in nature and engineering emerges from the 
constructal law of increase of flow access in time, when the flow system is endowed with freedom to morph. 
The course brings together the basic principles of fluid mechanics, heat transfer and thermodynamics, and 
teaches how to generate (to ‘discover’) shape and structure for energy flow systems. The course teaches design 
as science, and presents a paradigm that is applicable across the board, from engineering to biology, geophysics 
and social dynamics. Instructor: Bejan and Lorente. One course.
442. Introduction to Robotics and Automation. One course. C-L: see Electrical and Computer 
Engineering 383; also C-L: Information Science + Studies
461. Energy Engineering and the Environment. Efficiencies of both new and established energy sources 
and conversion methods. Evaluation of alternative energy technologies by statistical information and by 
modeling using principals of fluid mechanics, thermodynamics and heat transfer. Electricity generation by 
fossil fuels, nuclear, solar, wind and hydro. Space heating and cooling by traditional methods and by solar. 
Transportation energy in automobiles, mass transit and freight. Environmental consequences of energy choices 
on local, national and global scales, including toxic emissions, greenhouse gases and resource depletion. 
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 331L Thermodynamics. Instructors: Cocks and Knight. One course. C-L: 
Energy and the Environment
472. Aircraft Performance. Brief overview of the aerodynamics of wings and bodies including profile and 
induced drag, performance of propellers and internal combustion and gas turbine power plants; the power 
curve and implications on the performance of the aircraft in steady-state and accelerated flight included 
power required, airspeeds to fly, takeoff and landing performance, performance of aircraft in turning flight; 
introduction to the conceptual design of new aircraft. Co-requisite: Mechanical Engineering 336L. Instructor: 
Hall. One course.
473. Aerospace Structures. A rigorous course covering the analysis of aerospace structures. Basic elasticity, 
the stiffness method, plate and box-like structures, buckling, vibrations, loads, materials, design. Some project 
work and use of software. Prerequisite: EGR 201L, EGR 244L, Math 216. Use of Sakai. Text: Megson, ‘Aircraft 
Structures’, Eslevier, 2012. Instructor: Virgin. One course.
490. Special Topics in Mechanical Engineering. Study arranged on a special engineering topic in which 
the faculty has particular interest and competence as a result of research and professional activities. Consent of 
instructor and director of undergraduate studies required. Half or one course. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
491. Special Projects in Mechanical Engineering. Individual projects arranged in consultation with a 
faculty member. Open only to seniors enrolled in the graduation with distinction program or showing special 
aptitude for research. Half course to two courses. To be taught in the Fall. Prerequisites: B average and consent 
of the director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
492. Special Projects in Mechanical Engineering. Individual projects arranged in consultation with a 
faculty member. Open only to seniors enrolled in the graduation with distinction program or showing special 
aptitude for research. Half course to two courses. To be taught in the Spring. Prerequisites: B average and 
consent of the director of undergraduate studies. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
493. Engineering Undergraduate Fellows Projects. Continuation course for Engineering Undergraduate 
Fellows, contingent upon satisfactory completion of 394. Consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
494. Engineering Undergraduate Fellows Projects. Final continuation course for Engineering 
Undergraduate Fellows, contingent upon satisfactory completion of 394 and 493. Consent required. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.



 Mechanical Engineering (ME)860

499. Undergraduate Research Seminar Series. For students enrolled in senior-level undergraduate 
research. Intended for those pursuing Graduation with Departmental Distinction. Course will give students 
an opportunity to present research results to their peers and faculty in mechanical engineering throughout the 
semester, as well as provide exposure to the research of other mechanical engineering seniors. 0.0 Credit. S/U. 
Permission of Instructor.
510. Diffraction and Spectrometry of Materials. This course focuses on the fundamentals and 
applications of x-ray/neutron/electron scattering for the study of materials, with an emphasis on crystalline 
solids. The class will cover topics in diffraction for the study of the atomic structure of materials, as well as 
spectrometry to investigate microscopic dynamics and composition. The students should have a background 
in solid state physics/chemistry, quantum mechanics, materials science, and mathematics including Fourier 
transforms and complex numbers, convolution product. Open to graduate students; instructor consent required 
for undergraduate students to enroll. Instructor: Delaire. One course.
511. Computational Materials Science. This course will cover modern computational techniques for the 
prediction of materials properties, beginning from the scale of electrons and atoms and connecting to materials 
challenges in experiments today. Subjects covered will include Schroedinger’s equation and density functional 
theory, molecular dynamics, and so-called multiscale approaches to connect quantities computed at the 
nanoscale to macroscopic properties. The class will incorporate speci¿c examples as explicit computer exercises. 
The course is expected to provide an atomic-scale understanding of materials for both students with a primarily 
computational interest and those students whose research is primarily experimental. Open to graduate students; 
instructor consent required for undergraduate students to enroll. Instructor: Blum. One course.
512. Thermodynamics of Electronic Materials. Basic thermodynamic concepts applied to solid 
state materials with emphasis on technologically relevant electronic materials such as silicon and GaAs. 
Thermodynamic functions, phase diagrams, solubilities and thermal equilibrium concentrations of point 
defects; nonequilibrium processes and the kinetic phenomena of diffusion, precipitation, and growth. 
Instructor: Staff. One course.
513. Nanobiomechanics. The course consists of didactic lectures and many laboratory demonstrations 
and real experiments done by the students themselves. Topics include: Principles of single-molecule force 
spectroscopy (SMFS), SMFS experimental techniques, resolution and resolution limitations; Entropic and 
enthalpic elasticity of (bio)polymers; Structure and nanomechanics of DNA, polysaccharides, and proteins; 
Mechanisms of spontaneous folding, misfolding and refolding of proteins; Chaperones-assisted protein 
refolding; Principles of computer modeling of biopolymer mechanics; Development and characterization of 
novel, protein-based nanostructured, rationally designed biomaterials with unique mechanical properties. Open 
to graduate students; instructor consent required for undergraduate students to enroll. Instructor: Marszalek. 
One course.
514. Theoretical and Applied Polymer Science (GE, BB). An intermediate course in soft condensed 
matter physics dealing with the structure and properties of polymers and biopolymers. Introduction to polymer 
syntheses based on chemical reaction kinetics, polymer characterization. Emphasizes (bio)polymers on surfaces 
and interfaces in aqueous environments, interactions of (bio)polymer surfaces, including wetting and adhension 
phenomena. Instructor: Zauscher. One course. C-L: Biomedical Engineering 529
515. Electronic Materials. An advanced course in materials science and engineering dealing with materials 
important for solid-state electronics and the various semiconductors. Emphasis on thermodynamic concepts 
and on defects in these materials. Materials preparation and modification methods for technological defects in 
these materials. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 221L. Instructor: Curtarolo. One course.
516. Thin-Film Photovoltaic Technology. This course will focus in on a promising class of solar cells 
based on thin-film absorbers, some of which are already commercialized (e.g., CdTe, CIGS), while others are 
on the cutting edge of new photovoltaics technology (e.g., perovskites). The course will employ a combination 
of lecture, directed reading and hands-on approaches. The hands-on component of the course will involve 
fabricating PV devices and employing contemporary characterization and modeling tools to evaluate device 
performance. Specific techniques and the intellectual framework are more generally applicable to other PV 
and electronic devices. Recommended prerequisite: ECE 230 or related familiarity with electronic properties 
of materials. Open to graduate students; instructor consent required for undergraduate students to enroll. 
Instructor: Mitzi. One course.



Mechanical Engineering (ME) 861

517. Electromagnetic Processes in Fluids. Electromagnetic processes and transport phenomena in fluids 
is overviewed. Topics to be discussed include: Maxwell’s equations, statistical thermodynamic processes, origin 
of surface forces (i.e. Van der Waals), plasma in gases and electrolyte distribution, wave propagation near 
boundaries and in complex media, transport equations in continuum limit. Consent of instructor required. 
Instructor: Staff.
518. Biomedical Materials and Artificial Organs (GE, BB). One course. C-L: see Biomedical Engineering 
525
519. Soft Wet Materials and Interfaces. The materials science and engineering of soft wet materials 
and interfaces. Emphasis on the relationships between composition, structure, properties and performance 
of macromolecules, self-assembling colloidal systems, linear polymers and hydrogels in aqueous and 
nonaqueous liquid media, including the role of water as an “organizing” solvent. Applications of these materials 
in biotechnology, medical technology, microelectronic technology, and nature’s own designs of biological 
materials. Instructor: Needham. One course.
524. Introduction to the Finite Element Method. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 530
525. Nonlinear Finite Element Analysis. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 630
527. Buckling of Engineering Structures. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 647
531. Engineering Thermodynamics. Axiomatic formulations of the first and second laws. General 
thermodynamic relationships and properties of real substances. Energy, availability, and second law analysis 
of energy conversion processes. Reaction and multiphase equilibrium. Power generation. Low temperature 
refrigeration and the third law of thermodynamics. Thermodynamic design. Instructor: Bejan. One course.
532. Convective Heat Transfer. Models and equations for fluid motion, the general energy equation, and 
transport properties. Exact, approximate, and boundary layer solutions for laminar flow heat transfer problems. 
Use of the principle of similarity and analogy in the solution of turbulent flow heat transfer. Two-phase flow, 
nucleation, boiling, and condensation heat and mass transfer. Instructor: Bejan. One course.
533. Fundamentals of Heat Conduction. Fourier heat conduction. Solution methods including separation 
of variables, transform calculus, complex variables. Green’s function will be introduced to solve transient and 
steady-state heat conduction problems in rectangular, cylindrical, and spherical coordinates. Microscopic heat 
conduction mechanisms, thermophysical properties, Boltzmann transport equation. Prerequisite: Mathematics 
111 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Bejan. One course.
534. Fundamentals of Thermal Radiation. Radiative properties of materials, radiation-materials 
interaction and radiative energy transfer. Emphasis on fundamental concepts including energy levels and 
electromagnetic waves as well as analytical methods for calculating radiative properties and radiation transfer 
in absorbing, emitting, and scattering media. Applications cover laser-material interactions in addition to 
traditional areas such as combustion and thermal insulation. Prerequisite: Mathematics 353 or consent of 
instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
535. Biomedical Microsystems. he objective of the course is to introduce students to the interdisciplinary 
field of biomedical microsystems with an emphasis on biomedical microelectromechanical systems 
(bioMEMS) and microtechnologies. Topics include Scaling laws, Micropatterning of substrates and cells, 
Microfluidics, Molecular biology on a chip, Cell-based chips for biotechnology, BioMEMS for cell biology, Tissue 
microengineering, and Microfabricated implants and sensors. Open to graduate students; instructor consent 
required for undergraduate students to enroll. Instructor: Huang. One course.
536. Compressible Fluid Flow. Basic concepts of the flow of gases from the subsonic to the hypersonic 
regime. One-dimensional wave motion, the acoustic equations, and waves of finite amplitude. Effects of area 
change, friction, heat transfer, and shock on one-dimensional flow. Moving and oblique shock waves and 
Prandtl-Meyer expansion. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 336L or equivalent. Instructor: Hotz. One 
course.
537. Mechanics of Viscous Fluids. Equations of motion for a viscous fluid, constitutive equations for 
momentum and energy transfer obtained from second-law considerations, general properties and exact 



 Mechanical Engineering (ME)862

solutions of the Navier-Stokes and Stokes (creeping-flow) equations, applications to problems of blood flow in 
large and small vessels. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 336L or equivalent. Instructor: Staff. One course.
538. Physicochemical Hydrodynamics. An introduction to the fundamental principles of physicochemical 
hydrodynamics with an emphasis on the coupling between transport processes and interfacial phenomena. 
Topics include Brownian motion and molecular diffusion, electrokinetics and electrohydrodynamics, capillary 
and wetting. Through homework sets and a course project, the students will develop physical intuition and 
scaling tools to single out the dominant physicochemical process in a complex system. Prerequisite: Mechanical 
Engineering 336L or consent of instructor. Instructor: Chen. One course.
539. Interfacial Transport Phenomena for Energy Technologies. The main topics are transport 
phenomena taking place on interfaces in renewable/sustainable energy technology. These transport phenomena 
comprise of charge transport (ions, electrons), heat transfer, and mass transfer (e.g. diffusion), sometimes 
coupled with chemical reactions (e.g. catalytic, electrochemical, photochemical.). We will study these transport 
phenomena at interfaces, especially in the micro- and nano-scale and apply this knowledge to energy conversion 
and storage processes. These interfacial transport phenomena are essential for photovoltaic cells, fuel cells, 
batteries, solarthermal devices, thermoelectric devices, and many others. Open to graduate students; instructor 
consent required for undergraduate students to enroll. Recommended prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 431 
or equivalent. Instructor: Hotz. One course.
541. Intermediate Dynamics: Dynamics of Very High Dimensional Systems. Dynamics of very 
high dimensional systems. Linear and nonlinear dynamics of a string as a prototypical example. Equations 
of motion of a nonlinear beam with tension. Convergence of a modal series. Self-adjoint and non-self-adjoint 
systems. Orthogonality of modes. Nonlinear normal modes. Derivation of Lagrange’s equations from Hamilton’s 
Principle including the effects of constraints. Normal forms of kinetic and potential energy. Component modal 
analysis. Asymptotic modal analysis. Instructor: Dowell or Hall. One course. C-L: Civil and Environmental 
Engineering 625
542. Modern Control and Dynamic Systems. Dynamic modeling of complex linear and nonlinear physical 
systems involving the storage and transfer of matter and energy. Unified treatment of active and passive 
mechanical, electrical, and fluid systems. State-space formulation of physical systems. Time and frequency-
domain representation. Controllability and observability concepts. System response using analytical and 
computational techniques. Lyapunov method for system stability. Modification of system characteristics using 
feedback control and compensation. Emphasis on application of techniques to physical systems. Instructor: 
Staff. One course.
543. Energy Flow and Wave Propagation in Elastic Solids. One course. C-L: see Civil and 
Environmental Engineering 626
544. Advanced Mechanical Vibrations. Advanced mechanical vibrations are studied primarily with 
emphasis on application of analytical and computational methods to machine design and vibration control 
problems. Equations of motion are developed using Lagrange’s equations. A single degree-of-freedom system 
is used to determine free vibration characteristics and response to impulse, harmonic periodic excitations, and 
random. The study of two and three degree-of-freedom systems includes the determination of the eigenvalues 
and eigenvectors, and an in-depth study of modal analysis methods. The finite element method is used to 
conduct basic vibration analysis of systems with a large number of degrees of freedom. The student learns how 
to balance rotating machines, and how to design suspension systems, isolation systems, vibration sensors, and 
tuned vibration absorbers. Instructor: Kielb. One course.
545. Robot Control and Automation. Review of kinematics and dynamics of robotic devices; mechanical 
considerations in design of automated systems and processes, hydraulic and pneumatic control of components 
and circuits; stability analysis of robots involving nonlinearities; robotic sensors and interfacing; flexible 
manufacturing; man-machine interaction and safety consideration. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 542 
or equivalent and consent of instructor. Instructor: Staff. One course.
546. Intelligent Systems. An introductory course on learning and intelligent-systems techniques for the 
modeling and control of dynamical systems. Review of theoretical foundations in dynamical systems, and in 
static and dynamic optimization. Numerical methods and paradigms that exploit learning and optimization in 
order to deal with complexity, nonlinearity, and uncertainty. Investigation of theory and algorithms for neural 
networks, graphical models, and genetic algorithms. Interdisciplinary applications and demonstrations drawn 



Mechanical Engineering (ME) 863

from engineering and computer science, including but not limited to adaptive control, estimation, robot motion 
and sensor planning. Prerequisites: Mathematics 111 or 216. Consent of instructor required. Instructor: Staff. 
One course.
548. Multivariable Control. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 648
555. Advanced Topics in Mechanical Engineering. Opportunity for study of advanced subjects related to 
programs within mechanical engineering tailored to fit the requirements of a small group. Approval of director 
of undergraduate or graduate studies required. Instructor: Staff. Variable credit.
571. Aerodynamics. Fundamentals of aerodynamics applied to wings and bodies in subsonic and supersonic 
flow. Basic principles of fluid mechanics analytical methods for aerodynamic analysis. Two-and three-
dimensional wing theory, slender-body theory, lifting surface methods, vortex and wave drag. Brief introduction 
to vehicle design, performance and dynamics. Special topics such as unsteady aerodynamics, vortex wake 
behavior, and propeller and rotor aerodynamics. This course is open only to undergraduate seniors and graduate 
students. Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 336L or equivalent, and Mathematics 353 or equivalent. 
Instructor: Bliss. One course.
572. Engineering Acoustics. Fundamentals of acoustics including sound generation, propagation, 
reflection, absorption, and scattering. Emphasis on basic principles and analytical methods in the description 
of wave motion and the characterization of sound fields. Applications including topics from noise control, 
sound reproduction, architectural acoustics, and aerodynamic noise. Occasional classroom or laboratory 
demonstration. This course is open only to undergraduate seniors and graduate students. Prerequisites: 
Mathematics 353 or equivalent or consent of instructor. Instructor: Bliss. One course.
581. Introduction to Scientific Computing. Topics include: Discrete representation of floating-point 
numbers; integration of ODEs and systems of DEs; classification and numeric solution of PDEs; accuracy, 
consistency, and stability; integration and spectral representation of functions; introduction to finite difference, 
finite volume, and finite element methods; roots of equations; elements of linear algebra and conjugate gradient 
methods for sparse linear systems; programming methods; graphical user interfaces; arrays and collections; 
input-output and serialization; generics and lambda expressions; object oriented programming; 2D and 3D 
computer graphics; threading and parallelization; unit testing; third party numeric libraries. Open to graduate 
students; instructor consent required for undergraduate students to enroll. Instructor: Howle. One course.
591. Research Independent Study in Mechanical Engineering or Material Science. Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. The project is expected to be graduate-level 
work. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
592. Research Independent Study in Mechanical Engineering or Material Science. Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. The project is expected to be graduate-level 
work. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
593. Research Independent Study in Mechanical Engineering or Material Science. Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. The project is expected to be graduate-level 
work. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
594. Research Independent Study in Mechanical Engineering or Material Science. Research project 
mentored by an instructor with related interests and expertise. The project is expected to be graduate-level 
work. Instructor consent required. Instructor: Staff. One course.
626. Plates and Shells. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 646
627. Linear System Theory. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 627
631. Intermediate Fluid Mechanics. A survey of the principal concepts and equations of fluid mechanics, 
fluid statics, surface tension, the Eulerian and Lagrangian description, kinematics, Reynolds transport theorem, 
the differential and integral equations of motion, constitutive equations for a Newtonian fluid, the Navier-Stokes 
equations, and boundary conditions on velocity and stress at material interfaces. Instructor: Chen. One course.
632. Advanced Fluid Mechanics. Flow of a uniform incompressible viscous fluid. Exact solutions to the 
Navier-Stokes equation. Similarity methods. Irrotational flow theory and its applications. Elements of boundary 
layer theory. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 631 or consent of instructor. Instructor: Chen. One course.
633. Lubrication. Derivation and application of the basic governing equations for lubrication; the Reynolds 



 Mechanical Engineering (ME)864

equation and energy equation for thin films. Analytical and computational solutions to the governing equations. 
Analysis and design of hydrostatic and hydrodynamic slider bearings and journal bearings. Introduction to the 
effects of fluid inertia and compressibility. Dynamic characteristics of a fluid film and effects of bearing design 
on dynamics of machinery. Prerequisites: Mathematics 353 and Mechanical Engineering 336L. Instructor: 
Knight. One course.
634. Turbulence 1. One course. C-L: see Civil and Environmental Engineering 688
639. Computational Fluid Mechanics and Heat Transfer. An exposition of numerical techniques 
commonly used for the solution of partial differential equations encountered in engineering physics. Finite-
difference schemes (which are well-suited for fluid mechanics problems); notions of accuracy, conservation, 
consistency, stability, and convergence. Recent applications of weighted residuals methods (Galerkin), finite-
element methods, and grid generation techniques. Through specific examples, the student is guided to construct 
and assess the performance of the numerical scheme selected for the particular type of transport equation 
(parabolic, elliptic, or hyperbolic). Instructor: Howle. One course.
643. Adaptive Structures: Dynamics and Control. Integration of structural dynamics, linear systems 
theory, signal processing, transduction device dynamics, and control theory for modeling and design of adaptive 
structures. Classical and modern control approaches applied to reverberant plants. Fundamentals of adaptive 
feedforward control and its integration with feedback control. Presentation of a methodical design approach 
to adaptive systems and structures with emphasis on the physics of the system. Numerous MATLAB examples 
provided with course material as well as classroom and laboratory demonstrations. Instructor: Staff. One course.
668. Cellular and Biosurface Engineering. A combination of fundamental concepts in materials 
science, colloids, and interfaces that form a basis for characterizing: the physical properties of biopolymers, 
microparticles, artificial membranes, biological membranes, and cells; and the interactions of these materials at 
biofluid interfaces. Definition of the subject as a coherent discipline and application of its fundamental concepts 
to biology, medicine, and biotechnology. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 208 or consent of instructor. 
Instructor: Needham. One course.
671. Advanced Aerodynamics. Advanced topics in aerodynamics. Conformal transformation techniques. 
Three-dimensional wing theory, optimal span loading for planar and nonplanar wings. Ground effect and tunnel 
corrections. Propeller theory. Slender wing theory and slender body theory, transonic and supersonic area rules 
for minimization of wave drag. Numerical methods in aerodynamics including source panel and vortex lattice 
methods. Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 571. Instructor: Hall. One course.
672. Unsteady Aerodynamics. Analytical and numerical methods for computing the unsteady aerodynamic 
behavior of airfoils and wings. Small disturbance approximation to the full potential equation. Unsteady vortex 
dynamics. Kelvin impulse and apparent mass concepts applied to unsteady flows. Two-dimensional unsteady 
thin airfoil theory. Time domain and frequency domain analyses of unsteady flows. Three-dimensional unsteady 
wing theory. Introduction to unsteady aerodynamic behavior of turbomachinery. Prerequisite: Mechanical 
Engineering 571. Instructor: Hall. One course.
674. Fundamentals of Shock Wave Lithotripsy. This course will cover fundamental physics and 
engineering topics in shock wave lithotripsy (SWL), a non-invasive medical treatment of kidney and upper 
urinary track stone disease. A historical review of the development of SWL will be provided. Shock wave 
generation, focusing, coupling, and propagation in biological tissues will be discussed, as well as state-of-the-
art measurement techniques for characterization of lithotripter field and shock wave-stone-tissue interaction. 
Methodology and technologies to enhance therapeutic gain while reducing collateral tissue injury will be 
discussed, with laboratory projects to develop the basic concepts and essential skills for independent research. 
Prerequisite: Mechanical Engineering 336L, Mechanical Engineering 572, or BME 542. Instructor: Zhong. One 
course.
676. Advanced Acoustics. Analysis methods in acoustics including wave generation, propagation, reflection, 
absorption, and scattering; sound propagation in a porous material; coupled structure acoustic systems; acoustic 
singularities: monopoles, dipoles, quadrupoles; radiation from flat surfaces; classical radiation and scattering 
solutions for cylinders and spheres; Green’s functions, Radiation conditions, Modal analysis; sound fields 
in rooms and enclosures: energy methods; dissipation in fluid media; introduction to nonlinear effects. This 
course is open only to graduate students with some prior background in acoustics and applied mathematics. 
Prerequisites: Mechanical Engineering 572 or equivalent. Instructor: Bliss. One course.



Mechanical Engineering (ME) 865

The Major
The major requirements for mechanical engineering are included in the minimum total of 34.0 course 

credits listed under general requirements. The following specific courses or their approved alternatives must 
be included. Engineering courses: Engineering 121L (Engineering Innovation), Engineering 201L (Mechanics 
of Solids), Engineering 224L (Mechatronics), Engineering 244L (Dynamics); mechanical engineering courses: 
Mechanical Engineering 221L (Materials), Mechanical Engineering 321L (Analysis for Design), Mechanical 
Engineering 331L (Thermodynamics), Mechanical Engineering 336L (Fluid Mechanics), Mechanical Engineering 
344L (Control Systems), Mechanical Engineering 421L (Mechanical Design), Mechanical Engineering 424L 
(Mechanical Systems Design), Mechanical Engineering 431L (Heat Transfer); two upper-level mechanical 
engineering electives to encourage depth in areas of particular interest. In addition, the program allows for four 
additional general electives, two of which must be upper level and can be used for further breadth or depth. 
Students are encouraged to consult with their advisors when selecting areas of interest and electives. 

The MEMS Undergraduate Program Handbook (available on the departmental website at https://mems.
duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/planning) provides examples of course sequences that incorporate all general 
requirements and departmental requirements comprising the accredited mechanical engineering major. In 
addition, a downloadable MEMS Curriculum Flow Chart and MEMS Annotated Check Sheet are also available on 
the website, and provide precise summaries of the curriculum requirements and prerequisite structure.

Usually students intending to study abroad should plan to travel in the fall semester of their junior year. 
Typically these students are expected to take two courses abroad that are approved as equivalent to required 
mechanical engineering courses and/or mechanical engineering electives. Students should consult their advisor, 
the Office of Global Education, and the mechanical engineering and material science director of undergraduate 
studies.

Options for a certificate in aerospace engineering, a certificate in energy and the environment, a minor 
in energy engineering, a minor or second major in electrical and computer engineering, or a second major in 
biomedical engineering are described in the MEMS Undergraduate Program Handbook (available at https://
mems.duke.edu/undergrad/degrees/planning). Mechanical engineering and material science adheres strictly to 
the Pratt major and minor requirements described in the front portion of this bulletin. Students interested in 
second majors and minors with departments in Trinity College should seek information from the department of 
interest.
